her  puppies.
Dent  prescribed  for  following  case:
"My  English  setter  bitch,  six  years  old,  whelped  and  had  a  caked
udder  but  seemed  to  get  over  it.  Now  one  of  the  front  teats  shows  a
lump   or   cake   as   large   as   an   English   walnut.      What   treatment   do   you
advise  and  what  is  it?  Ans. — It  is  simply  caked.  Give  five  grains  of  the
iodide  of  potash  three  times  a  day  for  two  weeks  and  apply  with  gentle
friction  to  the  enlarged  teat  the  following  ointment:  Belladonna  extract
twenty  grains,  gum  camphor  twenty  grains,  lanolin  one  ounce.  She  can  he
bred  safely  when  she  comes  in   season."
Claws,  Overgrown — Toy  dogs  and  house  pets  which  have  little  or  no
exercise  out  of  doors,  where  they  can  dig  and  scrape  the  ground,  and  so
wear  the  claws  down,  suffer  from  an  overgrowth  of  them.  The  nail  curls
round,  and,  if  not  cut  in  time,  it  grows  into  the  sole  of  the  foot,  causing
soreness  and  lameness.  The  ends  of  the  claws  should  be  cut  off  with
a  pair  of  sharp,  strong  nippers,  or  nail  clippers,  such  as  one  can  buy  at
any  cutler's  for  7  5  cents.  Puppies'  toe  nails,  especially  of  those  running
on  grass  or  on  boards  in  winter,  grow  long  and  tend  to  spread  the  toes
open,  when  the  latter  should  be  compact.  Extreme  care  should  be  ob-
served that  only  the  dead  white  or  light  colored  nails  is  cut  off,  and  when
the  nail  is  dark,  judgment  must  be  exercised.  It  is  best  to  clip  little
and  often,  and  especially  so  if  the  nail  has  a  tendency  to  grow  in.
In  cases  which  have  been  neglected,  the  process  of  removal  should
be  gradual,  a  small  portion  being  taken  off  every  few  days  or  so  until
the  claws  are  of  the  normal  length.  If  the  sole  or  flesh  has  been  pene-
trated, it  will  most  likely  fester,  and  should  be  freely  bathed  in  warm
water,  and  the  "Unguentine"  salve  used  to  heal.
Cold  in  the  Head — See  Catarrh.
Clipping  Toe  Nails. — See  Overgrown  Claws.
Callosities. — Bare  callous  places  on  the  dog  from  rubbing,  chafing
or  lying  on  bare  boards.  Large  dogs  are  very  often  so  troubled.  Glycerine
or  vaseline  is  used  quite  often,  and  keep  treatment  up  for  some  time,  either
of  which  will  soften  and  tend  to  remove  these  lumps.  They  do  no  harm
but  detract  from  the  appearance  of  the  dog.  Eberhart's  skin  remedy  will,  in
due  time,  fix  them  up,  but  should  be  well  rubbed  in,  twice  daily.
Catarrh Dogs  that  are   badly  kenneled,   exposed   to  cold  winds,   and
those  that  have  lately  had  distemper,  or  a  severe  cold,  are  subject  to  an
inflammation  of  the  membranes  of  the  nostrils  and  air  passages,  and  a  more
or  less  thick  discharge  of  muco  purulent  matter  from  the  nose,  constitut-
ing what  is  commonly  known  as  catarrh.  The  disease  is  "disgusting  and
annoying  in  the  extreme,  and  has  a  very  debilitating  effect  upon  the
patients  general  health.  The  eyes  become  affected,  and  if  the  disease  is  not
promptly  treated,  the  inflammation  spreads  to  the  bones  of  the  head,  the
discharge  unendurably  offensive,  and  the  breathing  is  seriously  interferred
with.     The  longer  the  disease   is  neglected  the  worse  it  becomes.
Treatment. — Remove  all  discharge  from  the  nostrils  by  frequent  bath-
ing with  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid,  as  the  discharge  irritates  the
external  parts  and  is  liable  to  cause  Eczema.   With  a  small  syringe  a  small
quantity  of  the  following  solution  shouid  be  injected  into  the  nostrils  three
times  daily:
Sulphate  of  zinc ■ 8  grains
Boracic  acid    30  grains
Glycerine     1  ounce
Water    1  ounce
An  ordinary  atomizer  or  spray  can  be  used  to  good  advantage  several
times  a  day,  using  either  listerine  or  a  spray  after  the  following  formula:
Sodal  biborat 1   dram.
Sodal    carb 1   dram
Acid   carbolic    6   grains
Sulp.   of   zinc    1°   grains
Sulp.  of  morphine .' 10   grains
Glycerine     , 1   ounce
Distilled    water    8   ounces
Keep  dog  in  warm,  comfortable  quarters  and  pay  particular  attention
to  his  diet.  If  there  is  any  tendency  to  scantiness  of  urine,  or  costiveness,
give  30  drops  of  cascara  sagrada  in  a  teaspoonful  of  olive  oil.  Feed  any-
thing he  will  eat  and  give  a  tablespoonful  of  cod  liver  oil  emulsion,  (small
toys  of  course  less),  or  Fellows'  Syrup  of  Hyphophosphites  four  times  a
day,  containing  in  addition,  20  drops  of  the  Syrup  of  Iodide  of  Iron.  If
there  is  much  discharge  from  the  eyes  wash  them  several  times  daily  with
a   saturated  solution   of  boracic  acid.
Chronic  Catarrh  of  Uterus. — This  sometimes  occurs  in  bitches,  just
why  is  hard  to  say.  Such  bitches  are  not  liable  to  breed.  They  come  in
season  same  as  others,  but  the  discharge  at  such  times  is  white,  really
the  same  discharge  they  have  had  right  along,  only  not  noticed  perhaps.
Treatment  would  depend  on  cause  of  the  catarrh,  and  for  which,  refer
to   "Catarrh."
Chest  Founder. — See  Kennel  Lameness.
•
Catarrh,  or  Cold  in  the  Head.— Dogs  that  live  in  freedom,  although
exposed  to  changes  of  temperature  and  weather,  are  not  so  liable  to  attacks
of  catarrh  as  are  those  more  delicately  reared,  in  whom  a  sudden  change
from  the  close  atmosphere  of  the  room  to  the  open  air,  or  exposure  to  a
shower  of  rain,  frequently  will  produce  a  cold.  First  symptoms  are  shiv-
ering and  evident  languor,  succeeded  by  a  hot,  dry  nose,  with  a  thin  dis-
charge at  first,  but  which  gradually  thickens.  If  the  disease  proceed,
a  hot  skin,  dullness  about  the  eyes,  with  other  evidence  of  fever,  follow,
according  to  the  severity  of  the  case.  There  is  more  or  less  discharge
from  the  nose,  sometimes  accompanied  with  sneezing;  and  if  severe,  and
the  bronchial  tubes  affected,  a  cough  will  be  the  result.  It' is  pretty  well
understood,   when  applied   to   ourselves,   that  a   cold  uncared   for,   is  most
likely  to  lead  to  serious  illness;  and  it  is  no  less  true  of  the  dog.  (See
also  Ozaena).  In  puppies  the  symptoms  of  common  cold  may  be  mis-
taken for  those  of  distemper;  and  in  older  dogs,  if  unchecked  and  uncared
for,  it  is  likely  to  lead  to  bronchitis,  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  or  other
dangerous  disease.  It  is,  therefore,  very  necessary  to  pay  attention  to
the  first  appearance  of  a  deviation  from  health  in  this  direction,  mindful
of  the  old  proverb — "A  stitch  in  time  saves  nine."
A  coat  placed  on  the  dog,  as  previously  advised  under  Bronchitis.
Some  hardy  animals  will  need  no  further  care  than  an  extra  warm  bed,
and  a  warm  supper;  but  others  will  require  more  attention.
If  conjointly  with  other  symptoms  mentioned,  there  is  a  scantiness
of  urine,  and  costive  bowels,  give  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine,  follow-
ed by  a  few  doses  of  the  Fever  Mixture:
Powdered    Nitre    .' 1   dram
Sweet  Spirits  of  Nitre   •  Vz    ounce
Mindererous  Spirit   %    ounce
Wine   of  antimony    1   dram
Water    4  ounces
Dose  for  20  to  50  pound  dog,  one  tablespoonful  every  four  hours  in
a  little  gruel.  Smaller,  or  younger  dogs,  a  teaspoonful  to  a  de-
sertspoonful.
Remove  any  discharge  from  the  eyes  with  warm  water.  If  they  are  in-
flamed, bathe  with  the  following  lotion:  Boracic  acid,  powdered,  1  scr. ;
distilled  water,  6  oz.  To  allow  the  dog  to  breathe  freely,  the  nose  must
be  bathed,  which  will  tend  to  prevent  accumulation  of  mucus.  During  con-,
valesence  the  following  is  useful:  Easton's  Syrup  %oz.,  water  to  6  ounces.
Dose,  a  desertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  twice  a  day  after  food.  Here
is  where,  in  place  of  this,  I  would  use  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pill.  Unless  the
cold  has  engendered  some  more  dangerous  complaint,  this  treatment  will
be  all  that  is  required.  If  the  cough  be  severe,  use  some  cough  remedy.
See  Cough.
Calculi. — The  dog  is  more  frequently  the  subject  of  Calculi  (stone),
than  is  generally  supposed.  Their  locality  varies;  may  exist  in  the  biliary
ducts,  the  bladder,  the  kidneys,  or  in  the  urethra  (the  passage  of  the  penis).
In  Biliary  Calculi,  those  stones  situated  in  the  biliary  ducts,  providing
they  are  sufficiently  small  to  pass  the  duct,  are  not  of  great  moment — in
fact,  upin  post  mortem  their  existence  has  often  been  discovered,  while
during  life  po  pain  or  inconvenience  was  noticed,  but  should  these  stones
be  too  large  to  pass  the  ducts,  they  are  very  painful  and  a  most  fruitful
cause  of  jaundice.  The  bile,  which  in  health  passes  through  these  ducts,
becomes  completely  impeded  in  its  progress,  and  is  re-absorbed  by  the
blood  vessels  entering  the  general  system,  and  jaundice  is  established.
The  symptoms  of  biliary  calculi,  when  not  completly  blocking  the  ducts,
are  excessive  sickness  and  constipation,  with  pain  in  the  abdomen.  The
treatment  should   consist   in   allaying   the   pain,    when   the   stone   will   fre-
quently  pass  in  a  natural  way.  For  this  give  5  to  30  drops  tincture  of
opium  every  four  hours,  in  a  little  water,  and  a  soap  and  water  enema
night  and  morning  to  relieve  the  bowels,  opium  having  a  tendency  to  con-
stipate.
Cystic  Calculi  is  stone  found  in  the  bladder.  It  is  supposed  that
their  existence  is  rare,  but  such  is  not  the  case.  A  single  large  stone  is
not  frequently  seen,  but  a  number  of  small  ones,  especially  in  old  dogs,
is  not  at  all  uncommon.  In  the  former  case,  nothing  short  of  an  opera-
tion can  possibly  effect  a  cure;  but  when  one  takes  into  consideration  the
necessity  of  keeping  a  patient  in  one  position  after  the  operation  it  will
be  patent  to  most  that  in  canine  practice  the  removal  of  the  stone  is
seldom,  if  ever,  attended  with  success.  Small  calculi  will  frequently  pass
from  the  bladder  into  the  urinary  passages,  and  if  small  enough,  out  of
the  body,  through  the  penis;  but  often  these  stones  will  become  fixed  in
the  urethra  and  the  dog  is  unable  to  pass  its  water.  The  bladder  be-
comes distended,  and  if  not  relieved,  rupture  of  the  organ  results.  When
you  find  a  dog  cannot  pass  its  water,  get  a  catheter,  rub  a  little  olive  oil
or  vaseline  upon  it,  and  the  instrument  inserted  at  the  tip  of  the  penis.  Of
course,  the  dog  must  be  placed  on  its  back.  Insert  the  catheter  very
gently,  and  gradually  pass  it  into  the  bladder.  If  there  is  a  small  calculus
in  the  urethra  the  passage  of  the  catheter  will  be  obstructed,  and  while
this  is  so,  no  extreme  force  must  be  used,  or  a  very  extensive  injury  may
result.  A  little  gentle  and  prolonged  pressure  may  return  the  stone  into
the  bladder,  and  so  allow  the  urine  to  pass.  If  the  stone  cannot  be  re-
turned in  this  attempt,  inject  into  the  passage  of  the  penis,  a  little  olive
oil,  and  repeat  the  operation  with  the  catheter.  Calculi  sometimes  exist  in
the  kidneys  and  may  pass  into  the  bladder,  thence  through  the  urinary
passage,  and  so  out  of  the  body;  but  at  other  times  they  become  too  large
to  leave  the  organ,  causing  intense  pain  and  subsequent  death.  The  symp-
toms are  first,  stiffness  across  the  loins,  accompanied  by  pain  when  an
attempt  is  made  to  move;  the  urine  is  passed  in  small  quantities,  and  is
frequently — indeed  often — tinged  with  blood.  In  such  cases  it  is  a  matter
of  relieving  the  pain,  with  the  hope  that  the  stone  is  small  enough  to  gain
an  exit  by  the  penis.  To  relieve  the  pain  give  5  to  30  drops  of  tincture
of  opium,  about  every  four  hours,  and  apply  hot  flannels  to  the  loins.  A
dose  of  oil  to  relieve  the  bowels  is  beneficial,  as  any  straining  in  passing
the  faeces  would  increase  the  pain.  It  is  best  to  leave  these  cases  to  the
veterinarian.
Dew  Claws. — Darwin  describes  as  "accidental  monstrosities,"  yet  a  gen-
eral opinion  prevails  that  dew  claws  are  the  peculiar  inheritance  of  a  few
breeds  of  dogs,  and  from  this  false  idea  possession  or  non-possession  of
these  now  utterly  useles,  clumy  and  ugly  appendange  has  been  set  up
as  a  test  of  purity  or  impurity  of  breeding  in  specimens  of  the  variety
of  which  they  are  wrongly  ascribed  as  being  the  peculiar  property.  The
dew  claw  is  attached  to  a  rudiment,  more  or  less  developed,  of  an  addi-
tamentary  phalange  or  toe  situated  on  the  inner  side,  one  to  each  foot,  dis-
tant from  and  considerably  above  the  other  toes.
These  additional  toes  are  frequently  unattached  to  any  corresponding
metacarpal  or  metatarsal  bone,  having  only  a  ligamentary  union,  so  that
the  term  is  equally  applicable  to  the  extra  toe  often  seen  on  the  foreleg;
and,  as  they  are  neither  useful  nor  ornamental,  I  would  in  all  cases  have
them  removed,  being  only  a  disfigurement  in  any  breed.  This  should  be
done  when  the  pups  are  with  the  dam,  as  she  will  take  care  of  the  wound
and  heal  it  up  by  licking  it;  and  this  can  be  easily  done  with  a  pair  of
strong  scissors.  If  left  till  the  dog  is  older,  they  are  liable  to  bleed  a  good
deal,  and  the  pain,  of  course,  is  greater;  in  such  case,  the  wound  produced
by  the  excision  should  be  at  once  well  saturated  with  frairs'  balsam.  If
it  is  thought  well  to  remove  the  nail  only,  that  can  be  done  by  pulling  it
out  with  a  pair  of  nippers.
DESTRUCTION  OF  DOGS.
"It  is  often  necessary  to  destroy  dogs  that  have  become  so  crippled  or
injured  as  to  make  cure  very  doubtful;  and  in  most  litters  of  puppies
there  are  some  so  puny  or  so  wanting  in  the  characteristics  of  the  breed
that  they  ought  not  to  be  reared.  In  the  latter  case  it  is  most  humane  to
destroy  such  as  are  not  wanted  as  soon  after  they  are  born  as  possible;  but
even  when  a  mesalliance  has  taken  place,  one  at  least  of  the  puppies  should
be  left  with  the  dam,  unless  one  or  more  foster  pups  of  pure  blood  can
be  substituted.
For  destroying  young  puppies  there  is  no  more  convenient  or  less
painful  method  than  drowning;  while  for  mature  dogs  a  teaspoonful  of
Scheele's  prussic  acid  will  cause  instantaneous  death.  In  giving  it,  the
mouth  of  the  dog  should  be  held  open  and  upwards,  and  the  acid  poured
well  back  on  the  tongue.  The  very  greatest  care  is,  however,  necessary
in  dealing  with  a  drug  of  such  potency;  and  it  would  be  highly  dangerous
to  life  if  any  of  it  were"  spilled  over  a  cut  or  wound."
The  above  was  written  I  think,  by  F.  J.  Skinner,  as  I  got  it  from  Field
and  Fancy,  and  give  it  as  good  advise.  I  bave  used  the  prussic  acid  in
cases  of  an  old  and  helpless  dog,  that  had  to  be  put  out  of  the  way,  and
it  worked  very  quickly,  as  its  action  goes  direct  to  the  heart,  the  pain  so
short,  that  it  seems  to  be  humane.  Lately  I  have  cloroformed  several,
and  rather  favor  the  chloroform  route.  I  lay  the  dog  down  on  its  side,  my
right  hand  under  a  piece  of  carpet  on  which  is  some  cotton  in  the  center,
and  have  an  assistant  pour  on  this  cotton  the  chloroform,  and  I  then  quickly
apply  this  to  the  nose  of  the  dog,  the  cotton,  and  quickly  pull  the  carpet
around  the  head  to  neck,  holding  it  there  so  no  air  can  get  in,  the  assis-
tant meanwhile  holding  the  back  part  and  legs  of  dog.  The  dog  will  gen-
erally resist  the  fumes  of  the  chloroform,  but  only  for  a  few  seconds,  and
in  about  a  minute  he  will  be  dead,  providing  he  has  not  gotten  the  carpet
loose,  and  some  air  thereby.
Drowning  is  as  painless  as  any  death  can  be,  especially  for  puppies.
I  get  a  pail,  fill  it  partly  full  of  water,  bave  a  pan  that  fits  the  top  of  the
pail,  put  puppies  in,  the  pan  on  quickly,  and  on  top  of  the  pan  a  rock  or
lump  of  coal,  heavy  enough  to  hold  pan  down,  and  then  I  go  away.
Debility   and  Wasting. — It  happens   sometimes   that  a   dog   gradually
V
becomes  weak  and  wasting  in  flesh,  and  you  haven't  found  the  cause.  In
such  cases  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills  are  just  what  the  dog  should  have  for
a  few  weeks,  as  they  can  do  no  harm,  but  will  do  great  good  in  building  a
run  down  dog  up,  create  an  appetite  and  work  on  all  the  organs,  invigorat-
ing the  system.  They  are  different  from  other  condition  pills,  as  they
contain  no  arsenic  or  "dope"  of  any  kind.  Add  to  the  dogs  diet  for
a  few  days,  some  raw,  lean  beef  cut  up  fine,  sprinkled  with  a  little  pepsin,
once  a  day.  Also  look  for  any  symptoms  of  divergence  from  health  which
may  indicate  the  cause  of  the  trouble.
Docking  Tails — While  this  is  not  a  disease,  yet  it  happens  frequently
that  puppies  suffer  not  a  little  from  this  being  clumsily  done.  It  is  not  a
painful  operation  if  properly  done  and  before  puppy  is  weaned.  Fox  ter-
riers, poodles  and  a  few  other  breeds  should  have  their  tails  docked  to
conform  to  present  bench  show  requirements.  An  old  superstition  exists
with  some  people  yet  that  a  tail  must  be  bitten  off,  which  is  simply  erron-
eous and  disgusting.  Never  use  a  shears  or  scissors  as  the  pinching  before
the  cut  would  cause  more  pain  than  the  cutting.  Before  you  are  ready  to
cut  the  tail  get  an  ounce  of  tincture  of  iron.  .Have  a  solid  block  or  table,
have  an  assistant  hold  the  puppy  up  to  it  with  its  tail  laid  on  the  block;
calculate  how  long  or  short  a  tail  you  want  (three  inches  is  about  right),
then  let  assistant  hold  puppy  up  to  table  with  tail  lying  on  it;  have  a  sharp
butcher  knife  ready,  and  with  one  quick  and  rapid  cut  the  tail  is  off.  Tip
your  bottle  of  tincture  of  iron  up  to  and  against  the  end  of  tail  and  drop
your  pup  down  in  the  yard.  I  have  docked  the  tails  of  a  litter  of  poodle
pups  when  not  one  of  them  gave  a  cry  or  yelp  from  the  operation,  but
did  not  seem  to  notice  it  at  all  and  went  on  playing  as  usual  as  if  nothing
had  occurred.  The  mother  will  lick  and  take  care  of  the  tails,  and  they
will  heal  up  in  due  time.  Pull  the  skin  back  with  your  left  hand  when
you  are  ready  to  do  the  cutting.
Dysentery. — This  is  a  more  dangerous  disease  than  diarrhea,  which,
when  protracted,  sometimes  causes  it,  and  may  be  described  as  diarrhea
in  its  most  aggravated  form;  there  is  generally  feverishness  present,  con-
siderable pain,  and  the  evacuations  are  often  black  in  color  and  very  offen-
sive, and  followed  by  discharge  of  a  gelationous-like  substance  mixed  with
blood.  The  loss  of  strength  is  very  rapid,  and  the  dog  must  be  supported
by  drenching  with  beef  tea  and  a  little  port  wine  in  it,  the  medicine  and
general  treatment  being  the  same  as  in  diarrhea.  In  one  case  of  this  kind,
in  a  retriever,  I  gave  two  doses  of  twenty  drops  of  chlorodyne  with  very
good  effect.  The  discharges  in  dysentery  are  immediately  caused  by  in-
flammation of  the  mucous  membrane  lining  in  intestines,  and  are  distin-
guished from  diarrhea  by  containing  no  fecal  matter  except  occasionally
wTaen  it  is  voided  in  lumps;  but  the  ordinary  evacuations  in  dysentery,
although  they  vary  in  appearance,  are  generally  slimy  looking  and  com-
posed of  mucus  mixed  with  blood,  and  in  the  advanced  stages  of  the
disease  pus  is  discharged  and  shreds  of  the  mucus  membrane,  very  offen-
sive in  character.     The  disease  is  very  weakening,  causes  great  pain  and
straining,   and    is   very   difficult   to   manage;    it   often    occurs   in    protracted
cases  of  distemper,  and  carries  off  the  patient.
In  treating  dysentery  the  "anodyne  mixture"  given  in  diarrhea  treat-
ment should  be  tried  in  the  first  instance  alone,  and  if  ineffectual,  one  of
the  following  pills  for  a  dog  of  60-lb.  to  SO-lb.,  every  four  hours  may  be
tried  with  good  results.     For  smaller  dogs  half  a  pill.
Pills  for  Dysentery.
Take  of  tannic  acid  2  scruples  and  pure  sulphate  of  copper  1  dram,
powdered  opium  20  grains,  mixed,  and  divide  into  twenty  pills;  or  if  a
liquid  medicine  should  be  preferred,  the  following  will  answer:  Take  of
pure  sulphate  of  copper  48  grains,  dissolve  in  2  ounces  of  cinnamon  wa-
ter; add  V2  ounce  of  tincture  of  catechu,  y2  ounce  of  laudanum,  6  drams  of
aromatic  spirits  of  ammonia,  and  make  up  to  12  ounces  with  cinnamon
water.  Dose  for  an  80-lb.  dog  two  tablespoonfuls  every  four  hours;  smaller
dogs  in  proportion.  Clysters  of  starch,  with  one  dram  of  laudanum  in  each,
are  often  very  beneficial,  and  one  may  be  thrown  up  every  four  or  five
hours.
The  patient  should  have  perfect  rest,  all  evacuations  should  be  in-
stantly removed,  and  the  place  where  the  patient  is  (which  should  be  warm
but  airy)  kept  sweet  with  disinfectants.  The  food  should  consist  of  pearl
barley,  rice,  arrowroot  or  wheaten  flour,  boiled  in  milk,  varied  with  strong
beef  tea  slightly  thickened  with  stale  bread  or  plain  biscuit.
I  have  cured  dogs  of  dysentery  of  long  standing,  obstinate  cases,  with