is  peculiar  and  unmistakable;  the  back  ebing  arched,  the  feet  drawn  in
toward  each  other  and  the  tail  tightly  tucked  between  his  legs;  in  colic,
the  belly  is  sometimes  distended  considerably  with  gas,  and  is  then  known
as  flatulent  colic.  It  is  a  disease  of  frequent  occurrence  in  dogs,  and  the
exciting  causes  are  various;  exposure  to  wet  and  cold;  getting  dogs,  espe-
cially house  dogs,  to  swin  in  cold  inclement  weather,  are  common  causes;
the  presence  of  worms  in  the  intestines  also  produces  colic.  But  the  most
common    cause    is    undoubtedly    the    giving    of    improper    food;    sugar    and
other  sweet  things  are  likely  to  produce  it;  puppies  just  after  weaning
are  very  liable  to  it,  especially  if  they  have  small  lumps  of  meat  or  other
solid  food  thrown  to  them,  which  they  can  not  well  chew,  but  greedily
bolt;  or  having  a  portion  of  one  meal  left  in  the  dish  till  the  next  meal
is  added  is  very  likely  to  produce  it,  because  the  stale  portion  undergoes
fermentation,  that  is,  becames  sour,  and  the  fermentation  is  carried  on  in
the  stomach.  Colic  is  sure  to  yield  to  prompt  and  proper  measures,  and
the  treatment  is  simple  and  safe.  As  soon  as  observed,  give  the  sufferer
a  dose  of  "anti-spasmodic  drops."  Compound  spirits  of  sulphuric  ether
(known  as  Hoffmans'  anodyne),  and  tincture  of  opium  (laudanum)  equal
parts.  Mix,  and  keep  in  a  well  stoppered  bottle  in  a  cool  place.  Dose  for
15-lb.  to  35-lb.  dog  would  be  a  small  teaspoonful  in  two  teaspoonfuls  of  milk
or  gruel.  It  must  be  given  diluted  with  thin  gruel,  milk  or  water,
and  if  immediate  relief  does  not  follow,  administer  a  double  quanitity,  as
a  clyster  in  gruel,  or  the  dose  may  be  repeated  in  half  an  hour.  In  "flatulent
colic,"  known  by  the  distended  belly  sounding  like  a  drum  when  tapped  with
the*  end  of  the  finger,  from  10  to  30  drops  of  spirit  of  sal  volatile  may  be
advantageously  added  to  dose  of  "anti-spasmodic  drops,"  or  the  following
draught  may  be  given  and  repeated  in  an  hour  if  the  dog  is  not  relieved:
Carbonate    of    soda 20   grains
Aromatic  spirits   of  ammonia 30    drops
Essence    of    ginger 5   drops
Laudanum      15  drops
Peppermint    water 2   tablespoonfuls
This  is  a  dose  for  a  medium-sized  dog,  such  as  a  pointer  or  a  greyhound.
For  puppies  and  smaller  breeds  use  less  of  this  as  the  dose.  After  the  attack
has  subsided  give  the  dog  a  gentle  aperient,  such  as  the  "mild  purge":
Syrup  of  buckthorn 3   parts
Syrup  of  white  poppies 1   part
Castor  oil 2   parts
Dose  for  dog  15-lb.  to  30-lb.,  is  a  tablespoonful.     Bottle  must  be  well
shaken   before  using.      Larger  dogs  a  little  more.
Keep  on  a  laxative  diet,  and  do  not  let  the  dog  have  violent  exercise
for  a  day  or  so.  Endeavor  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  attack  and  avoid  a
repetition.  Lead  poisoning  produces  a  peculiar  form  of  colic,  and  clogs
should  not  have  water  to  drink  that  has  been  collected  in  leaden  cisterns.
The  using  of  one-eighth  grain  doses  of  morphine  hypodermically  every
half  hour  or  hour  during  the  attack  of  colic  will  give  relief  very  soon.
Ooryza  is  the  name  given  to  a  common  cold  when  confined  to  the  nose
and  eyes,  and  a  running  at  the  nose  and  watery  eyes.  I  have  found  the
following  plan  to  quickly  cure  it.  Take  a  large  sponge,  wring  it  out  of
warm  water,  sprinkle  it  freely  with  vinegar  of  squills,  and  hold  it  to  the
clogs  nose  so  that  he  inhales  the  fumes.  Or,  half  fill  an  upright  jar  or  jug
of  suitable  size  with  bran,  saturate  it  with  hot  water,  and  sprinkle  over  and
stir  into  the  bran  the  following:  A  tablespoonful  of  ordinary  vinegar,  a
teaspoonful  of  laudanum,  and  six  drops  of  glycerine,  and  carbolic  acid
(British  Pharmacopoeia).  Mix,  and  hold  the  dog's  nose  over  it.  This
quantity  is  a  double  handful  of  bran  in  a  quart,  or  three-pint  jar,  is  suitable
for  a  20  to  50  pound  dog.  A  good  idea,  if  eyes  continue  to  run,  would  be
to  use  the  eye  lotion  of  Hydrastes  and  Camphor  water,  which  you  will  find
given   under   Eye    troubles.
Claws,  Inflammation  at  the  Roots  of; — Dogs  used  to  the  chase,  or  hunt-
ing in  scrubby  heather,  or  running  much  over  hard,  uneven  roads,  suffer
from  s#re  toes;  the  parts  around  the  roots  of  the  claws  are  swollen,  in-
flamed and  tender,  making  the  dog  lame,  and,  indeed,  almost  unable  to  get
about;  there  is  redness  between  the  toes,  and  sweating  or  thin  serous
discharge  therefrom.
Such  cases  are  often  very  difficult  to  cure.  First  give  a  dose  of  aper-
ient medicine,  and  keep  the  dog  up,  giving  him  plenty  of  soft  bedding,  and
a  light  diet.  Foment  the  part  night  and  morning  with  warm  water,  and
bathe  freely  with  this  lotion:  Calomel,  2  scr. ;  lime  water,  12  oz. ;  mix.
Shake  the  bottle  well  when  using  it,  which  should  be  done  four  or  five  times
a  day.  If  the  foregoing  fail,  try  Goulard's  Extract  of  Lead,  2  dr.;  tincture
of  arnica,  V2  oz.;  distilled  water,  1  pint;  mix  and  apply  freely  four  or  five
times  a  day.  If  the  case  is  a  very  bad  one,  wrap  the  foot  in  a  piece  of
lint  saturated  with  the  lotion,  and  pull  over  it  a  chamois  leather  boot,
which  the  dog  can  be  prevented  from  gnawing  and  pulling  off  by  use  of  a
muzzle,  over  the  mouth-part  of  which  a  piece  of  canvas  has  been  sewn.
Concussion  of  the  Brain. — Often  occurs  in  canine  practice,  and  is  due
to  accidents.  In  most  cases  the  dog  becomes  unconscious,  and  the  breath-
ing is  heavy  or  usually  nearly  imperceptible.  Gradually  consciousness  re-
turns, but  often  a  stiffness  of  the  limbs  and  an  uncertain  gait  remains  for
a  time.  The  treatment  should  consist  in  the  administration  of  stimu-
lants, but  great  care  must  be  taken  not  to  attempt  forcing  liquid  upon  an
unconscious  animal,  or  choking  will  be  the  inevitable  result.  Brandy  can  be
injected  under  the  skin  (subcutaneously).  Ice  when  procurable  should  be
applied  to  the  head  and  spinal  cord,  and  ammonia  to  the  nostrils.  If  there
is  a  fracture  of  the  skull  an  operation  will  become  necessary.  A  part  of
the  bone  may  be  pressing  upon  the  brain,  when  it  would  have  to  be  raised,
and  so  relieve  the  pressure,  in  which  case  a  vererinarian  must  be  called  at
once.
Constipation. — Watch  your  dog  every  day  as  to  condition  of  his  bowels.
A  dog  properly  fed  and  exercised  will  hardly  ever  be  troubled  with  consti-
pation. I  turn  my  dogs  out  into  their  yard  each  morning  and  stay  there
a  few  minutes  and  watch  them.  Their  first  inclination  is  to  hunt  a  place
and  empty  themselves  (a  dog's  natural  habit).  If  I  find  one  that  is  con-
stipated, by  this  I  mean  unnaturally  so,  where  passage  is  too  hard  and
crumbles  up  into  dust  by  putting  your  foot  on  it,  I  watch  that  dog  that
night,  and  if  still  the  same  it  gets  a  dose  of  castor  oil  the  next  morning,
unless  as   sometimes  happens, the   bowels  have  meanwhile  corrected   them-
selves.  No  dog  should  go  over  twenty-four  hours  without  a  passage,  and
better  if  not  so  long.  As  to  the  size  of  the  dose  of  castor  oil  this  depends
greatly  on  size  and  age  of  dog.  Take  a  grown  dog  the  size  of  a  fox  terrier
or  pug,  by  this  is  meant  a  dog  over  a  year  old,  and  you  can  give  it  a  table-
spoonful.  If  this  don't  work  in  an  hour  or  so,  repeat  the  dose  once.  A
dog  a  year  old  or  over,  like  an  English  setter,  could  stand  two  tablespoons-
ful  at  a  dose,  while  the  larger  breeds  like  a  St.  Bernard,  could  stand  an
ounce  and  a  half,  which  would  be  three  tablespoonsful,  or  even  two  ounces
at  a  dose.  Some  dogs,  like  some  persons,  are  harder  to  physic  than  others,
so  that  judgment  should  be  used;  the  idea  being  not  to  give  too  much,
but  just  enough  to  accomplish  the  desired  result.  Fluid  extract  of  cascara
sagrada  is  a  remedy  much  used  for  constipation,  and  to  the  dose  of«castor
oil  from  five  to  twenty  drops  of  this  can  be  added  and  given  with  it  with
benefit.
Puppies  from  six  months  to  a  year  old  should  be  given  smaller  doses
in  proportion  to  age  and  breed  of  dog.
Young  puppies  as  a  rule  should  have  rather  loose  bowels  than  other-
wise, and  are  rarely  ever  troubled  with  constipation.
Watch  your  dog's  bowels,  which  is  easily  done  by  spending  a  few  min-
utes each  morning  after  it  is  let  out  in  the  yard.  Often  if  only  slightly
bound  up,  or  passage  is  a  bit  too  hard,  a  little  oatmeal  (same  as  you  cook
it  for  yourself),  or  some  cooked  liver  for  its  breakfast,  or  a  good  drink
of  buttermilk  will  loosen  it  up  all  right,  in  place  of  the  oil.  If  passage
is  normal  (shaped  and  not  hard),  do  nothing  at  all.  Every  dog  should
empty  itself  at  least  twice  a  clay  and  puppies  oftener.
Some  dogs  are  troubled  with  chronic  constipation,  and  in  such  cases,
use  a  laxative  pill,  several  of  which  are  made  for  dogs.  I  have  found  Clay-
ton's very  good.
Cough. — Cough,  strictly  speaking,  is  a  symptom  of  disease,  rather  than
a  disease  itself,  but  it  is  in  very  many  cases  to  non-professional  observation
the  most  distinct  sign  that  something  is  wrong;  indeed,  so  markedly  is  this
the  case  that  we  speak  of  a  person  having  a  bad  cough  as  the  ailment  from
which  he  suffers,  rather  than  the  symptom  of  that  ailment,  and  hence  we
have  innumerable  specific  remedies  as  cough  mixtures,  cough  pills,  etc.
Our  dog  we  treat  in  the  same  way,  taking  the  sign  for  the  substance,  the
smoke  for  the  fire,  and  fortunately  without  much  practical  harm,  for  gen-
erally speaking,  the  medicine  that  will  ease  a  cough  is  acting  favorably
on  the  disease  of  which  the  cough  is  an  evidence.  To  decide  what  parti-
cular disease  is  indicated  by  the  cough,  the  concomitant  symptoms  and
circumstances,  as  described  under  the  special  disease,  which  are  usually
preceded  or  accompanied  by  cough,  must  be  taken  into  account,  and  the
special  treatment  called  for  in  each  case  followed.  Coughs  vary  as  much
in  character  as  do  the  diseases  of  which  they  are  in  many  cases  the  most
pronounced  indication.  Thus,  in  common  cold  the  cough  slight  and  humid;
in  bronchitis,  hard,  dry  and  frequent;  and  in  inflammation  of  the  lungs
and  pleurisy,  short  and  suppressed,  doubtless  from  the  great  pain  caused  by
the  effort.  When  the  throat  is  sore,  the  cough  is  hoarse  and  generally  ac-
companied by  more  or  less  difficulty  in  swallowing;   in  asthma,  the  cough
may  be  described  as  wheezy,  and  is  often  followed  by  vomiting.  Cough
in  distemper  has  a  peculiar  husky,  hollow  sound.  Cough  may  be  pro-
duced by  a  bit  of  bone  or  other  substance  sticking  in  the  throat  and  causing
irritation,  in  which  case  the  cough  is  the  natural  effort  to  get  relief,  and
ceases  with  the  removal  of  the  irritating  cause.  As  a  cough  is  almost  in-
variably connected  with  some  derangement  of  the  respiratory  organs  or
air  passages,  its  warning  should  never  be  neglected,  and  the  early  resort
to  the  use  of  the  following  pills  will  be  sure  to  relieve,  will  frequently  cure,
and  can,  under  no  circumstances,  do  any  harm:
COUGH  PILL.
Powdered   ipecacuanha    6   grains
Powdered   opium    6   grains
Compound   squill    pill    24   grains
Powdered  gum  ammoniacum    2  4   grains
Powdered    licorice 24   grains
Powdered    rhubarb     12    grains
Mix  and  make  into  twenty-four  pills;  dose  for  a  15-lb.  to  40-lb.  dog,
one  pill  night  and  morning;  under  15-lbs.  half  a  pill,  and  for  large
breeds  give  1 V2  pills  as  a  dose.
Another  very  good  cough  mixture  for  many  kinds  of  coughs  is:
Muriate   of  ammonia    2   drams
Compond  syrup  morphia    2   ounces
Aqua   destil    2   ounces  .
Dose:  From  half  to  a  teaspoonful  every  two  hours  according  to  size
of  dog.     For  puppies  10  to  15  drops  as  a  dose.
For  a  Bronchial  Cough  (Chronic). — The  following  is  a  very  good  one.
A  teaspoonful  is  the  dose,  as  this  cough  is,  of  course,  found  in  older  dogs
only,  and  will  do  for  all  breeds  except  very  small  toy  dogs,  when  half  a
teapoonful   will    do:
Spirit    chloroform    y2    dram
Wine    of   ipecac    3   drams
Tincture  of  squills 5  drams
Simple   syrup 1   ounce
Aqua    to    make 4   ounces
There  are  a  great  many  other  good  cough  remedies,  in  fact  anything
good  for  the  master's  cough  is  good  for  the  dog's,  and  I  herewith  give  sev-
eral prescriptions  that  I  know  to  be  good  by  having  tried  them.
A  dog  that  is  well  and  in  good  condition  may  have  a  dry  cough,  does
not  cough  very  much  at  a  time,  but  quite  often.  I  have  cured  such  cases
with  the  following:
Carbonate  of  aninioniacum    3  drams
Fluid  extract  of  belladonna 2  drams
Gum    camphor    5  drams
Syrup  of  squills '. 5  drams
Simple   syrup    4  ounces
Fluid  extract  of  licorice    4  ounces
Dose   for  a  medium-sized   dog,   a  teaspoonful   every   four  hours.      This
is  a  very  good  cough  syrup.     Large  dogs  could  have  1  y2  teaspoonsf ul.
A  cough  remedy  advertised  for  humans,  called  "Pinex,"  I  tried  on  dogs,
and  found  it  to  be  very  good  for  many  coughs.  You  can  get  a  fifty  cent
bottle  of  Pinex  of  your  druggist,  and  from  this,  prepare  at  home,  a  pint
of  cough  syrup  that  would  cost  a  couple  dollars,  by  mixing  the  contents
of  the  bottle  in  a  syrup  you  can  easily  make  from  less  than  a  pound  of
granulated  sugar.  The  dose  would  be  from  half  to  a  teaspoonful,  every
two  to  four  hours.  Dogs  larger  than  fifty  pounds,  could  stand  a  little
larger  dose.  I  have  used  this  for  the  cough  a  dog  has  in  distemper,  and
it  did  the  dog's  cough  good,  not  conflicting  with  the  other  medicines
being  used.
"Very  lately  the  following  prescription  was  prescribed  for  me  by  a
regular  doctor  for  a  chronic,  bronchial,  dry  cough,  that  one  of  my  old
dogs  has  every  fall  and  winter,  which  nothing  I  had  ever  used  would  stop —
this  one  did  it — and  I  consider  it  a  most  valuable  one.
Syrup  Oocillaiia,  Compound  (Parke  Davis  &  Co.). — Dose  would  be  a
teaspoonful  for  dogs  up  to  50  pounds,  and  a  little  more  for  very  large
breeds,  every  two  or  three  hours.  A  dose  of  any  cough  syrup  should  al-
ways be  given  the  last  thing  at  night.
Here  is  an  "old  fashioned  cough  syrup"  for  a  "sore  throat  cough."
Boil  down  some  onions  and  brown  sugar,  and  give  teaspoonful  every  twd
or   three  hours.
Another  very  sensible  article  on  coughs,  (which  I  found  some  place),
commends   itself:
"There  are  two  kinds  of  coughs  that  a  dog  suffers  from;  one  comes
from  the  throat  and  the  other  from  the  stomach,  and  each  requires  dif-
ferent treatment.  There  is  about  as  much  use  in  trying  to  cure  a  stomach
cough  with  a  bronchial  remedy  as  there  would  be  for  you  to  take  a  laxa-
tive for  chilblains,  and  yet  it  is  often  done.  The  bronchial  cold  may  be
treated  in  the  following  manner:  Put  in  a  warm  room  and  give  either  cod
liver  oil,  syrup  of  white  pine  or  some  similar  preparation.  A  good  formula
for  coughs  in  dogs  is  syrup  of  squills,  syrup  of  wild  cherry,  of  each  two
parts;  glycerine,  one  part.  If  the  cough  becomes  so  bad  that  there  is  a
great  deal  of  difficulty  in  breathing,  an  ordinary  water  kettle  placed  over
a  gas  stove  or  some  other  hot  fire,  so  that  the  escape  of  steam  will  be
rapid,  will  be  found  to  be  a  relief.  Of  course,  a  regular  bronchitis  kettle
or  one  of  the  patent  lamps  that  can  be  had  for  a  small  sum  at  any  drug
store,  can  also  be  used.  In  the  stomachie  cough  it  is  always  wise  to  give
a    purgative   and    to    treat    for    worms,    as    internal    parasites    are    in    nine
cases  out  of  ten  the  primary  cause  of  the  trouble.  Two  or  three  days
should  then  he  allowed  to  elapse,  and  the  treatment  repeated.  This  may
be  done  a  third  and  even  a  fourth  time,  if  the  cough  does  not  disappear.
Do  not  physic  every  day  or  you  will  weaken  the  animal  too  much,  but  allow
two  or  three  days  to  pass."
Cuts,  Tears  or  Wounds. — The  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  stop  the
bleeding,  which  can  generally  be  done  by  simple  pressure  with  the  fingers,
or  by  a  few  folds  of  lint  pressed  firmly  against  the  cut.  Unless  a  consid-
erable artery  has  been  severed,  these  means  are  generally  successful,  but  if
such  is  the  case,  a  ligature  will  be  the  cure.  After  bleeding  is  partially  or
entirely  stopped,  remove  all  foreign  bodies,  such  as  glass,  dirt,  thorns  or
splinters,  but  avoid  using  very  cold  or  hot  water  in  doing  so,  having  it  about
blood  warm.  If  the  cut  or  wound  is  superficial,  the  cleansing,  pressing
of  the  parts  together  and  dressing  it  with  friars  balsam  or  tincture  of
myrrh,  applied  with  a  small  brush  or  feather,  will  be  all  that  is  required,
the  using  of  these  tinctures  leaving  on  the  wound  a  protective  covering
of  gum.  If  the  lips  of  the  wound  will  not  meet,  draw  them  together  with
a  few  stitches,  using  a  slightly  curved  suture  needle  and  a  silk  thread
which  should  be  waxed  with  beeswax  to  prevent  absorption  and  its  acting
as  a  seaton.  Sewing  up  wounds  is  easy.  Pass  needle  through  the  skin  on
one  side  of  the  wound  from  the  outside  inward  and  then  through  the
part  of  the  opposite  lip  from  the  inside  outward,  drawing  the  lips  gentlv
together,  tie  the  thread  in  a  double  knot  and  cut  ends  off  close.  Do  each
stitch  separately.  If  the  cut  is  a  long  one,  use  a.  pair  of  light  cross-forceps
to  hold  the  lips  together  ahead  of  where  you  are  sewing,  as  a  neater  job
can  be  made  in  so  doing.  The  stitches  should  be  about  a  half  an  inch
apart  as  a  rule.  It  is  advisable  to  muzzle  the  dog  afterwards  or  keep  on  a
light  bandage  to  keep  the  dog  from  biting  off  the  threads  and  undoing  the
stitches  with  his  mouth  and.  tongue.  The  wound  heals  by  adhesion  or  gran-
ulation matter  forming  and  great  attention  must  now  be  paid  to  keeping
it  clean  so  as  to  prevent  purification  of  exuding  matter.  Constantly  wash
away  all  discharge,  sponging  fr-eely  with
Pure   carbolic   acid    %    ounce
Glycerine    2  ounces
With  water  to  make  a  quart.     Or  the  antiseptic  prescription  referred  to  be-
low.
In  slight  cuts  in  the  legs  or  feet,  all  that  is  necessary  is  to  wash  well
and  apply  friars  balsam.  If  severe  and  requiring  bandaging,  apply  a  piece  of
lint  under  the  bandage  saturated  with  a  mixture  of  friars  balsam  and
camphorated   oil.
The  above  is  Dalziel's   idea.
Lately  I  have  in  such  cases  used  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen,  or,  better  yet,
applied  tincture  of  iodine  and  then  to  heal  it  up,  used  the  "Ungucntine"
salve,  as  advised  in  Bites,  instead  of  the  above,  and  with  best  of  results*
Either  Dalziel's  or  my  own  will,  however,  do.  In  applying  the  Peroxyde
of  Hydrogen,  just  tip  the  bottle  up  against  the  wound  for  a  second,  when
you  will  see  a  white  foaming  or  bubbling  discharge  come  from  the  sore.
This  should  not  be  wiped  off  or  allowed  to  remain  on  for  over  a  minute
or  so,  but  removed  then  by  a  little  water  squeezed  on  it  from  a  sponge  or
cloth.  In  using  the  tincture  of  iodine,  apply  it  with  a  small  brush,  and
after  it  has  dried,  then  rub  the  "Unguentine"  on,  once  or  twice  daily.  A
good  idea  is  ,  to  always  keep  on  hand  a  small  vial  of  tincture  of  iodine,
kept  tightly  corked.  Judgment  must  be  exercised  as  to  length  of  time  the
wound  is  to  be  kept  open  and  dischorging,  the  Peroxyde  tending  to  close
it  up,  as  will  the  tincture  of  iodine,  but  use  the  latter  on  wound  as  long
as  there  is  any  bleeding,  once  a  day  generally  is  often  enough  for  this.
Chorea. — Dalziel's  treatise  and  treatment  I  give  in  full,  for  it  is
eminently  correct,  judging  by  my  own  experience.  It  is  a  hard  disease  to
cure,  but  I  have  cured  young  dogs  one  or  two  years  old.  Read  what
Dalziel  says,  and  if  you  have  a  dog  so  afflicted,  at  least  try  to  cure  it.
I  never  admit  but  what  any  disease  can  be  cured,- or  helped,  and  I  try
every  remedy  anyhow.  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills  have  cured  cases  in
younger  dogs  for  me,  and  as  they  always  do  good  and  never  harm,  it  is
worth  while  trying,  for  you  will  be  doing  your  dog  some  good  at  least.
There  is  not  much,  if  any,  pain  in  chorea,  and  I  had  a  pug  bitch  three
years  old  that  had  a  chronic  case  of  it,  but  yet  she  bred  and  raised  a
healthy  litter  of  pups.  This  was  an  exception,  however,  as,  being  a  ner-
vous trouble,  it  is  transmitable,  and  I  would  not  advise  using  either  a