Administering  Medicine. — It  is  foolish  to  force  medicine  down  a  dog's
throat  if  he  can  be  "tricked"  into  taking  it  naturally,  without  even  being
aware  that  he  is  doing  so.  Even  when  force  is  necessary  there  is  no  need
for  opening  a  dog's  teeth  when  liquid  is  to  be  given,  for  if  poured  into  the
patient's  cheek  it  will  drain  through  the  teeth.  When  a  dog  refuses  to  swal-
low whatever  is  placed  in  his  mouth — as  he  is  liable  to  do — all  that  is  neces-
sary is  to  hold  his  head  up  and  close  his  nostrils  and  jaws  for  a  couple  of
seconds.
Giving  pills  to  some  dogs  is  a  more  difficult  matter.  Hold  the  dog's
head  well  up,  open  mouth  with  your  left  hand,  and  place  the  pill  well  down
his  throat  on  the  base  of  the  tongue,  quickly  close  his  jaws  for  a  second
and  slightly  chuck  your  hand  or  finger  agaist  his  throat  and  he  is  bound
to  make  a  gulp  and  swallow  it.  Some  dogs  are  very  cute  and  will  keep  the
pill  inside  or  on  one  side  and  when  you  are  not  looking  will  quickly  spit
it  out,  so  watch  them  for  a  minute  or  so  to  be  sure  the  pill  has  gone  down.
Pills  can  also  be  given  hid  in  a  piece  of  meat  (providing  the  dog  is  not  so
sick  that  he  has  refused  food),  but  if  you  give  them  pills  this  way,  fool
the  dog  by  giving  him  first  a  few  pieces  of  meat  one  at  a  time,  having  your
prepared  piece  handy  when  he  will  not  suspect  and  will  take  it,  following
it  up  with  a  few  more  pieces  of  meat.
A  great  many  dogs  will  take — when  not  too  sick — castor  oil,  cod  liver
oil,  syrup  of  phosphates,  and  many  powders  even,  in  a  little  savory  broth  or
porridge.  When  powders  are  refused  in  food,  mix  them  in  a  little  butter,
honey  or  syrup,  and  place  well  back  on  the  tongue.  With  large  and  pow-
erful dogs  the  mouth  can  be  held  open  by  twisting  a  towel  around  the
upper  jaw,  and  an  assistant  is  generally  necessary  except  with  small  toy
dogs,  which  can  be  held  tightly  between  the  knees  while  giving  the  med-
icine. As  soon  as  the  medicine  is  placed  on  the  tongue,  close  the  mouth
and  hold  it  shut  till  dog  is  seen  to  swallow,  but  must  not  be  held  so  as  to
interfere  with  his  breathing  through  the  nostrils.  The  best  way  to  give
liquid  medicine  is  to  gently  raise  the  dog's  head  and  form  a  pouch  or  pocket
by  drawing  outwards  -and  slightly  upwards  the  lower  lip  at  the  corner  of
the  mouth,  and  gradually  pouring  into  the  funnel  thus  formed.
Gelatine  capsuls  are  very  handy  in  administering  powders.  If  the
dose  is  bulky  it  is  better  to  divide  it  up  among  several  small  capsules  than
it  is  to  try  to  inclose  it  in  a  single  large  one.  Powders  are  also  adminis-
tered by  mixing  with  butter,  syrup  or  glycerine.
Injections. — Use  a  rubber  syringe,  never  a  glass  one,  as  they  are  dan-
gerous.    A  bulb  syringe  with  a  flexible  tube  two  or  three  inches  long  I  find
the  best,  as  you  can  so  handily  hold  the  bulb  in  your  hand  and  work  it
quickly  when  ready  before  the  dog  can  get  out  of  position.  The  regular
fountain  syringe  is  also  very  good.  For  injection  in  the  ear  there  is  a
regular  ear  syringe  made.
"There  is  nothing  analogous  between  the  dog  and  the  horse.  The  vet-
erinarian who  treats  a  dog  from  an  equine  standpoint  is  a  failure.  In  tem-
perament and  nervous  organization  the  dog  resembles  man,  but  his  diges-
tive organs  differ  so  radically  taht  medicine  does  not  act  on  each  alike.  As
an  instance,  common  salt  has  no  particular  effect  upon  man.  On  the  dog,
in  small  doses,  it  is  an  emetic;  in  large  doses,  a  poison.  Castor  oil  is  a
mild  laxative  on  man;  on  the  dog  it  is  an  active  purge.  Epsom  salts  act
only  mildly  on  man;  on  dogs  it  acts  violently,  producing  copious,  watery
stools.  Aloes  and  rhubarb,  recognized  as  purgatives  on  man,  have  no
particular  effect  o  ndogs,  and  so  with  numerous  other  drugs.
"The  dog  is  particularly  susceptible  to  the  action  of  chloroform.  This
is  on  account  of  the  irregular  heart  action  previously  mentioned.  His
sensitive  nervous  system  responds  quickly  to  the  smallest  doses  of  strych-
nine, and  a  minute  quanty  of  mercury  produces  profuse  salivation.  These
drugs  should  only  be  administered  by  an  expert.  Opium  is  not  particu-
larly dangerous  in  its  action  on  dogs.
"Between  human  exclamations,  canine  howling,  coughing  and  gasping
and  occasionally  biting,  the  dog  generally  escapes  without  the  medicine.
Kindness  and  strategy  are  the  only  safe  methods  for  giving  medicine.  Aim
to  get  the  dog  to  take  his  medicine  without  knowing  that  he  is  getting  it.
This  can  be  accomplished  by  having  the  medicine  in  pill  form.  One  of
the  pills  can  be  introduced  into  a  slit  made  in  a  small  cube  of  meat.  Disarm
the  patient  of  suspicion  by  preparing  several  similar  cubes  of  meat  without
the  pills.  Give  him  one  of  these.  He  may  examine  it,  but  finding  it  all
right,  will  swallow  it.  Another  should  be  given  him.  If  he  swallows  it
without  examination,  give  him  the  cube  containing  the  pill  and  it  will
follow  its  predecessor.  Do  not  use  fluids  if  it  is  possible  to  avoid  them.
Gelatine  capsuls  can  be  had  in  various  sizes  to  accommodate  all  drugs.
It  is  better  to  give  two  small  capsules  than  one  large  one.  To  give  a
capsule  have  an  attendant  take  a  small  dog  in  his  lap;  a  large  dog  should
be  gently  backed  into  a  corner.  Stroke  the  dog's  head  and  face  gently;
then  with  the  left  hand  held  over  the  head  just  in  front  of  the  eyes,  press
the  lips  against  the  teeth  just  enough  to  cause  him  to  open  his  mouth.
Moisten  the  capsule,  place  it  as  far  back  on  the  tongue  as  possible,  which
can  be  inserted  well  down  the  throat  without  danger  to  either  the  dog  or
the  physician.  Close  the  mouth  quickly  and  the  capsule  will  be  swallowed."
The  following  was  published  in  the  Dog  Fancier,  written  by  their
veterinarian,  Dr.  D.  H.  Hall,  and  is  worth  publishing,  containing  many  good
ideas:
"In  the  treatment  of  dogs  or  other  domestic  animals  one  great  obstacle
to  successful  medication  is  the  difficulty  often  encountered  in  the  adminis-
tration of  remedies.
Dogs  frequently  refuse  to  swallow  liquids  or  offer  such  strenuous  ob-
jections that  a  portion  of  the  medicine  is  spilled  and  the  quantity  admin-
istered becomes  merely  speculative.  Hence  it  is  not  advisable  to  use  liquid
medicines  at  all  for  dogs  if  it  can  be  avoided.
Hypodermic  injections  of  alkaloidal  "solutions  are  the  most  prompt,  effi-
cient and  reliable  method  of  administration  we  have,  but  as  it  pre-supposes
the  possession  of  a  hypodermic  syringe  the  plan  is  not  feasible  in  the  ma-
jority of  instances.
Other  methods  are  to  have  the  remedies  incorporated  in  tablet  or
granule  form  or  given  in  gelatin  capsules.  For  ordinary  purposes  this  is
the  most  convenient  method.  The  tablet  or  capsule  can  be  placed  toward
the  back  of  the  tongue  and  readily  forced  back  with  the  finger  far  enough
so  that  to  swallow  is  the  only  thing  the  patient  can  do.
Always  treat  him  kindly  and  give  an  approbative  pat  on  the  head
and  when  the  time  for  the  next  dose  arrives  he  will  be  ready  for  it.
At  times  liquid  medicines  are  necessary,  especially  saline  laxatives,  and
as  they  are  decidedly  of  unpleasant  taste  and  the  dose  necessarily  large  it
is  frequently  quite  a  difficult  matter  to  convince  the  patient  that  it  is  "not
bad  to  take."  Rochelle  salts  is  the  least  nauseating  of  the  saline  laxatives
and  when  given  largely  diluted  with  water  its  action  is  increased  and  the
taste  not  so   disagreeable.
In  giving  liquids  place  the  patient  in  a  corner,  but  do  not  handle  rough-
ly. Have  the  medicine  in  a  bottle  or  hard  rubber  syringe.  Take  hold  of
the  fold  at  the  angle  of  the  mouth  and  pull  out  to  form  a  pouch,  then  pour
in  a  small  quantity  at  a  time,  repeating  as  it  is  swallowed.
A  dose  of  castor  oil  is  sometimes  required,  especially  to  supplement
the  action  of  a  vermicide.  If  this  is  given  in  about  four  parts  of  milk
the  taste  will  be  largely  disguised  and  the  administration  more  pleasantly
effected.
In  applying  lotions  to  the  eye  the  lids  can  be  separated  by  the  thumb
and   finger  and   the   solution   dropped   in   from   a   medicine   dropper.
When  the  nasal  passages  are  occluded  by  adherent  discharges,  appli-
cations of  warm  water  and  steaming  will  be  of  benefit.  For  the  latter,  the
patient  can  be  held  with  the  nose  over  a  vessel  containing  hot  water  (med-
icated if  the  case  demands)  and  enclosing  head  and  vessel  with  a  towel.
Care  must  be  taken  though  to  allow  sufficient  air.
In  applying  remedies  to  the  ear  the  most  useful  implement  is  a  blunt,
hard  rubber  syringe.  If,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  apply  dry  powder  a
"blower"  will  be  found  of  great  service.
In  treating  wounds  the  watchword  should  be  antisepsis,  but  in  the
use  of  such  preparations  one  must  always  bear  in  mind  the  danger  that
may  result  from  the  patient  licking  the  dressing.  Of  antiseptics  iodoform
should   never   be   used    for   the   dog   except   in    minute   quantities,    owing   to
liability  of  absorption  and  poisoning.  In  applying  remedies  other  than
per  orem  it  sometimes  becomes  necessary  to  restrain  the  patient  from  biting
his  would-be  benefactor.  This  can  be  accomplished  by  tying  a  long  piece
of  tape  tightly  around  the  paws,  having  the  knot  on  the  under  side.  Then
carry  the  ends  back  of  the  ears  and  tie  again.
In  the  application  of  unguents  to  the  skin  of  long-haired  dogs  time
is  really  sometimes  saved  by  clipping.  The  skin  can  be  more  thoroughly
cleansed  and  dried  and  the  remedy  more  evenly  applied  and  consequently
better  results  obtained.
In  the  writer's  experience,  no  appreciable  difference  could  ever  be
observed  in  the  texture  or  color  of  the  hair  when  it  had  grown  out  again.
The  clipping,  however,  should  not  be  resorted  to  except  in  obstinate  cases
and  during  favorable  weather.
Rectal  injections  are  frequently  indicated,  especially  in  house  dogs
where  from  lack  of  exercise  and  irregular  habits  the  faeces  becomes  im-
pacted. In  cases  of  collapse,  extreme  weakness  and  refusal  of  food  it
sometimes  becomes  necessary  to  introduce  predigested  foods  and  medi-
cines per  rectum.  The  ordinary  bulb  syringe  or  those  of  the  hard  rubber
variety  can  be  used  for  this  purpose,  but  the  nozzle  must  not  be  pointed
enough  to  injure  the  mucus  membrane  as  abrasions  of  the  latter  might
prove  troublesome.
In  connection  with  the  administration  of  medicine,  it  will  be  well  to
remember  that  all  drugs  act  more  powerfully  on  an  empty  stomach  than
when  it  holds  food,  either  liquid  or  solid.  Therefore,  powerful  remedies  and
those  which  are  of  irritating  character,  such,  as  arsenic,  iron,  nux  vomica
and  cod-liver  oil,  should  be  given  after  feeding,  so  that  they  will  mingle
"with  the  food  and  be  absorbed  slowly.  Oil  can  be  administered  easily  if
floated  on  milk.  Whisky,  alcohol  and  all  fluids  of  strong  taste  should  be
freely  diluted  with  water  before  administering,  at  least  four  parts  of  water
to  one  of  whisky.
BREEDING  AND  RAISING  OF  PUPPIES
Bitches  come  in  season  on  an  average  of  twice  a  year,  about  every  five
to  seven  months,  and  the  question  is  often  asked  whether  it  is  advisable
to  bceed  a  bitch  during  the  first  period  of  oestrum.  The  answer  depends
much  upon  the  breed  and  state  of  maturity.  As  a  general  thing,  it  is  not
well  for  a  young  bitch,  which  can  not  be  fully  developed  at  the  age  of  ten
months,  to  undergo  the  strain  on  vitality,  which  maternity  causes.  Some
terriers  mature  quickly,  but  the  large  breeds  should  certainly  not  be  bred
until  at  least  eighteen  months  old,  and  in  any  case  it  is  wise  to  allow  the
first  period  to  pass.
Another  question  asked,  is  whether  a  bitch  should  be  bred  at  every
period,  or  rather,  whether  it  is  wise  to  do  so.  This  depends  a  good  deal
upon  the  vigor  of  the  bitch,  but  unless  a  bitch  be  looked  upon  as  a  mere
machine  to  produce  puppies  for  the  benefit  of  the  owner's  pocket,  it  is  well
to  allow  the  bitch  to  be  served  every  other  period.  When  a  bitch  is  bred
twice  a  year  and  has  a  litter  each  time,  the  strain  upon  her  vitality  must  be
very  great,  and  unless  the  mother  is  more  than  ordinarily  vigorous,  later
litters  will  show  a  corresponding  weakness.
A  bitch  first  shows  signs  of  coming  in  season  by  bleeding.  Now,  if  you
are  watching  for  her  and  take  note  of  the  clay  the  bleeding  begins,  then
one  method  to  determine  when  she  is  ready  to  take  the  dog  is  to  count
from  this  day,  and  from  the  tenth  to  twelfth  day  she  is  ready  for  the  dog.
This  rule  does  not  always  work,  however,  for  I've  had  bitches  that  were  ready
and  willing  to  be  served  even  in  the  sixth  day  and  yet  others  would  not  take
the  dog  till  the  fifteenth  day.  Quite  a  good  plan  is  to  take  her  out  for  a
walk  on  chain  when  you  think  she  is  about  ripe,  and  let  her  meet  the  first
d  )£  she  sees,  or,  if  you  have  a  dog  on  your  place,  allow  her  near  this  dog
for  a  minute,  and  if  she  would  accept  this  dog,  then  you  can  be  certain  that
she  Is  ready  to  be  bred  and  take  her  to  the  dog  you  have  selected.  If  you
try  this  plan,  be  careful  or  else  she  might  fool  you  and  get  served  by  this
dr?  »he  had  met.     Dogs  are  quick  workers.
After  a  visit  to  the  dog,  the  mother  will  carry  her  progeny  about  63
or  64  days,  as  a  rule,  but  they  sometimes  whelp  a  few  days  sooner  or  later,
and  you  need  not  be  alarmed  unless  they  go  by  from  five  days  to  a  week,
when  very  likely  trouble  is  in  store  and  assistance  to  be  given,  or  better  yet,
call  in  a  good  veterinarian.  I  have  had  bitches  whelp  a  week  ahead  of  time;
such  cases  are  rare,  however,  and  have  raised  the  pups  by  extra  attention
given  for  a  few  days  as  to  often  putting  the  pups  to  the  teats  to  nurse  if
thay  did  not  get  there  themselves.  We  can  no  reckon  the  time  exactly.  Much
depViVs  upon  the  health  and  strength,  and  even  mental  idiosyncrasy.
The  best  time  for  the  visit  is  early  spring,  as  the  puppies  have  then
all  the  long  summer  before  them  to  romp  and  get  strong  in.
At  the  time  of  mating,  particularly,  exercise  should  be  well  regulated,
and  must  be  insisted  on.  Whilst  at  this  period  exercise  is  essential,  ex-
haustive work  would  be  detrimental.  The  amount  of  exercise  should  de-
pend on  the  individual,  a  gross  and  lusty  bitch  needs  plenty  of  freedom,
while  one  the  reverse  would  need  less  exercise,  in  proportion  to  her  physical
strength.
For  a  couple  weeks  before  bitch  is  due  to  whelp,  she  must  have  a  daily
walk  up  to  within  a  day  or  so  of  the  time  due,  but  this  must  be  gentle  as
she  is  very  heavy.
tp  have  a  goed  litter  of  puppies,  a  bitch  must  not  onky  possess  blood
free  from  all  taint  of  disease,  but  she  must  be  strong  and  in  good  condition
about  the  time  of  oestrum,  or  heat.
If  you  have  in  any  way  neglected  her,  or  if,  through  circumstances
over  which  you  have  probably  had  no  control,  she  has  fallen  off  a  bit,  begin
to  get  her  in  form  three  months  before  the  time  of  her  coming  on.  It  will
pay  you  to  do  so.
The  following  as  to  giving  the  bitch  some  medicine  to  open  her  bowels
I  found  in  Field  and  Fancy,  but  who  written  by  I  do  not  know:
"Some  there  are  who  deem  it  wrong  to  give  a  mild  cathartic  Imme-
diately before  the  time  of  whelping.  A  violent  purge  is  certainly  to  be  de-
precated, but  it  is  the  firm  opinion  of  the  writer  that  the  bitch  is  mater-
ially helped  and  benefited  by  a  little  opening  medicine.  At  any  rate,  that
course  is  invariably  followed  by  the  most  successful  accouchers  among
women,  and  it  must  be  obvious  to  the  merest  novice  that  when  the  system
is  greatly  upset,  or  about  to  undergo  a  severe  ordeal,  the  condition  of  the
stomach  and  bowels  is  of  the  highest  importance.  A  moderate  dos«J  of
castor  oil,  say  a  dessertspoonful  for  a  30-lb.  dog,  or  even  some  sweet  olive
oil,  will  do  all  that  is  required  without  inducing  excessive  straining.  Such
has  been  my  custom  for  a  good  many  years,  and  events  have  proved  its
value."
My  plan  is  to  watch  the  passages  of  bitch  just  before  she  whelps,  and
if  she  is  constipated,  to  then  give  her  a  mild  dose  of  castor  and  olive  oil.
I  believe  when  a  bitch  is  just  ready,  that  one  service  is  sufficient,  and
rarely  ever  allow  my  own  to  be  served  but  once,  but  to  -make  assurance
doubly  sure,  a  second  service  after  an  interval  of  twenty-four-  hours,  would
be  advisable.  If  you  are  sending  her  away  to  some  kennel  to  be  bred,  ship
her  not  later  than  the  eighth  day.
It  would  be  as  well  if  you  could  go  with  your  favorite  instead  of  send-
ing her,  but  most,  if  not  all,  good  breeders  are  not  only  gentlemen,  but  lovers
of  dogs  and  will  take  the  greatest  care  of  the  bitch.
The  length  of  time  of  a  bitch  being  in  season  is  from  fifteen  to  twenty
days  as  a  rule,  but  there  are  exceptions  to  this.  If  a  bitch  is  served  late  in
season,  the  service  generally  prolongs  the  season  or  period  in  which  she
would  willingly  accept  the  dog.  A  very  fat  bitch  should  never  be  bred,
as  in  so  doing  you  are  liable  to  lose  not  only  the  pups,  but  the  bitch  her-
self. After  the  mating,  the  bitch  should  be  kept  secluded  (no  food  or  water
having  boen  given  her  directly  before),  nor  any  food  for  six  hours  after.
Now,  for  the  next  two  months  the  bitch  must  require  every  attention.
For  safety's  sake  she  should  be  kept  away  from  her  old  canine  friends  for
about  a  week.  She  must  not,  however,  be  denied  exercise,  and.  all  through-
out the  time  she  is  carrying  her  puppies  she  must  have  plenty  of  exercise  and
fresh  air.  But  it  must  not  be  of  too  boisterous  a  character;  .and:. I  would  not
permit  a  bitch  in  whelp  to  play  with  a  dog  of  her  own  size,  or  a  larger  dog,
too  much.  A  collision  between  her  and  a  heavy  companion  might  be  very
serious  indeed.
If  your  bitch  is  a  house  pet  and  has  been  accustomed  to  jumping  upon
chairs,  the  safest  plan  to  guard  against  accidents  is  to  tip  the  chairs  up
against  the  wall  for  a  week  or  two  before  she  is  due  to  whelp — if  you  are
yet  keeping  her  in  the  house.  When  very  heavy,  she  can  not  always  make
the  same  jump,  and  should  she  miss,  striking  against  chair  and  fall  back,
it  would  likely  mean  the  death  of  her  and  the  pups.
For  a  few  days  after  being  bred,  quietude  and  exercise  on  chain  is  ad-
visable for  safety,  and  should  then  follow  exercise  twice  daily,  in  proportion
to  constitution,  temperament  and  condition,  and  as  she  nears  the  time  of
whelping,  the  chain  may  be  again  necessary,  as  a  restraint.
From  the  time  bitch  is  bred,  the  food  need  not  be  different  from  usual
until  five  or  six  weeks  gone,  and  showing  heavy  with  pUps,  when  she  will
of  course  need  more  to  eat.  Feed  her  now  more  liberally  with  a  fair  pro-
portion of  beef  and  mutton.  Raw  beef  cut  up  fine,  is  very  gxrod  in  winter,
a  little  once  a  day  as  she  approaches  the  time  of  whelping.  Bread  and  milk
and  especially  soups  will  be  very  good  for  the  other  meals;  soft  foods  and
of  an  opening  nature  being  desirable.     A  large  beef  or  veal  bone  to  gnaw
on  is  good.  Plenty  of  milk  is  also  what  she  needs.  The  nearer  her  time
gets  the  more  she  will  need  to  eat.  Feed  her  three  times  a  day  during  the
last  two  weeks.  On  the  feeding  of  the  bitch  during  this  time  will  depend
the  size  and  healthfulness  of  the  coming  litter,  and  when  the  pups  are  born,
a  warm  pan  of  milk  will  be  relished  by  the  dam,  in  which  may  be  put  a
little  baking  soda.  Soft  food  should  be  continued  for  a  few  days,  when  a
return  to  ordinary  diet  will  be  safe.
Many  times  a  female,  after  giving  birth  to  her  young,  refuses  to  eat
and  loses  her  appetite.  A  few  drops  of  assafcetida  given  in  water  and  a
little  rubbed  on  her  gums  usually  restores  her  appetite,  and  with  a  good
appetite  usually  comes  a  good  flow  of  milk.
It  is  usually  after  a  lapse  of  sixty-three  days  that  the  pups  come,  and
some  days  before  the  event  a  suitable  secluded  place  should  be  provided
for  her.  It  is  important  that  a  record  should  be  kept  of  date  she  was  bred.
Have  her  stall  or  kennel  prepared  a  week  before  she  is  due.  If  in  winter
this  must  be  warm,  but  with  light  and  ventilation.  The  latter  must  only
be  furnished  from  the  top.
I've  found  the  best  plan  to  be,  to  securely  tack  down  an  old  carpet  or
blanket. on  the  floor  which  enables  the  puppies  to  get  a  foothold  when  first
born,  and  thus  crawl  to  their  mother.  The  bitch  will  scratch  and  dig  for
several  days  before  whelping  and  try  her  best  to  scratch  up  the  carpet,  so
put  in  plenty  of  tacks.  This  carpet  should  be  exchanged  for  a  clean  one,  the
next  day  after  she  whelps.  A  little  of  Clayton's  or  the  Vermilax  Co.'s  flea
powder  sprinkled  around  in  her  box  shoufcl  be  clone  daily.  A  loose  carpet
in  box  is  not  advisable,  as  a  puppy  is  liable  to  get  under  it  and  get  smothered.
Not  all  bitches  are  good  mothers,  some  being  too  nervous,  and  through
this  nervousness  and  from  fear  that  they  may  lose  some  of  their  children,
or  that  you  might  take  one  away,  they  get  excited,  and  lay  on  a  pup  or  two.