Carbonate  of  soda 12   grains
Gum  acacia  sufficient  to  make  into  twelve  10-grain  pills.
Very  small   toy  dogs  should   have  half  a  pill.      Give  these   twice   a
day  until  all  the  symptoms  have  disappeared.
A  most  excellent  wash  for  the  mouth  in  order  to  remove  the  unpleasant
smell,  is  a  solution  6f  chlorinated  soda,  diluted  with  twenty-four  to  thirty
times  its  volume  of  water.  Wash  out  the  mouth  freely  with  this  several
times  a  day.
The  following  will  harden  the  gums  and  assist  in  bringing  them  to  a
healthy  state:  Take  powdered  alum,  %  ounce;  simple  tincture  of  myrrh,  1
ounce;  dissolve  the  alum  in  a  pint  of  water  and  add  the  tincture  of  myrrh.
The  ulcers  that  occur  upon  the  gums  should  be  touched  with  a  10  per
cent  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver.
Milk-Glands,  Inflammation  of  the. — See  Mammltis.
Meningitis. — See  Brain,  Inflammation  of  the.
Milk,  Absence  of. — This  trouble  Is  quite  too  often  met  with  in  bitches,
I  regret  to  say.  Usually  the  result  of  weakness,  obesity,  or  disease  of  the
mammary  glands.  It  sometimes  is  luckily  only  temporary,  and  the  secre-
tion can  be  restored  with  friction  to  the  glands  with  the  hand.  The  fol-
lowing can  be  given  to  weakly  bitches:
Tincture  cinchonae  co 1  ounce
Liquor   cinchonae    V2  dram
Spirits-  of  ammonia  aromatic   %  ounce
Water,   to   make    6  ounces
Dose,  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  three  times  daily,  according
to  size  of  bitch.
Maw-AVorms. — See  Worms.
Mammltis,  (Inflammation  of  the  Milk-Glands)  frequently  occurs.  Caus-
es are,  retention  of  milk,  the  result  of  taking  away  the  puppies  immediately
after  born,  or  too  early,  or  from  their  death,  or  cold  or  injuries.  Symp-
toms are  a  redness  and  tenderness  of  the  parts,  the  milk  is  curdled,  and
often  puss  or  blood  accompanies  it,  the  former  if  abscesses  have  formed.
Very  highly  important  that  such  cases  should  be  attended  to  at  once.  As
quick  as  first  symptoms  are  noticed  foment  the  parts  with  warm  water
during  the  day,  being  careful  to  dry  well  afterward.  If  caused  by  the
retention  of  milk  by  the  bitch  having  lost  her  puppies,  or  they  were  taken
away  from  her,  the  milk  must  be  drawn  away  frequently  by  the  hands.  '
Where  possible,  and  the  bitch  will  permit,  a  puppy  should  be  given  her.
Give  her  one  to  two  drams  of  epsom  salts  with  from  ten  to  twenty  grains
of  bicarbonate  of  soda  twice  daily  in  water,  until  the  bowels  are  well
relaxed.  By  adopting  this  treatment  in  the  early  stages  the  inflammation
will  usually  subside  and  the  gland  regain  its  normal  condition.  Pus  or
matter  will  accumulate  in  protracted  cases,  and  abscesses  form.    The  latter
must  be  eradiated  by  lancing,  and  boracic  acid  lotion  or  ointment  applied
to  the  part  nigbt  and  morning,  and  to  prevent  her  from  licking  it  she
should  have  a  muzzle  with  a  piece  of  canvas  sewn  over  the  front.  Where
abscesses  have  formed,  patches  of  the  gland  will  generally  become  obliter-
ated, and  of  no  further  use.  Mammitis  does  sometimes  assume  a  chronic
form,  the  glands  become  enlarged  and  indurated.
Milk  Fever  (Parturient  Apoplexy)  is  uncommon  in  the  bitch.  There  is
clanger  of  causing  it  by  robbing  her  of  all  her  puppies,  especially  if  she  has
plenty  of  milk,  in  a  case  of  where  she  has  got  out  on  you  and  bred  by  mistake
to  some  common  dog.  Drown  all  but  one  puppy  as  soon  as  born,  if  you  don't
want  to  raise  them,  but  leave  one  to  nurse  for  a  week  or  so.
The  Symptoms  are  apparent  weakness,  staggering,  quick  hard  breath-
ing, hot  dry  nose  and  tongue,  the  tongue  furred;  the  milk  is  suppressed,
and  the    bitch  shows  extreme  thirst.
Treatment — Apply  ice  to  the  head,  if  possible;  if  not,  then  cold  water
often  relieves  the  bowels  by  clysters.  Keep  her  quiet  and  as  little  disturbed
as  can  be,  a  soft  bed  provided  so  the  head  will  be  somewhat  elevated.  This
is  very  important.  Also  give  Glover's  and  Clayton's  Distemper  Cure  every
two  or  three  hours  in  teaspoonful  doses  for  ordinary  sized  dogs,  for  a  day
■or  two,  until  she  is  better,  which  will  allay  the  fever.  The  bitch  should
be  milked  two  or  three  times  a  day.  If  a  caked  breast  appears  treat  this
as  prescribed  under  that  heading.  In  Milk  Fever  when  the  bitch  is  uncon-
scious, nourishment,  such  as  brandy  and  milk,  can  be  given  her  rectum.
The  bladder  must  be  emptied  by  means  of  the  catheter.
Navel  Hernia,  or  Rupture. — An  enlargement  of  the  navel,  often  met
with  in  puppies,  and  may  be  simply  an  expansion  of  the  same,  or  cicatrice.
Navel  hernia  is  the  protrusion  of  a  portion  of  the  intestine — the  membra-
neous covering  of  the  bowels.  It  may  be  caused  by  extra  strain  at  birth
on  the  umbilical  cord,  or  the  tongue  of  the  mother  may  extend  the  wound.
It  is  a  soft,  movable  tumor  over  the  navel,  varying  in  size,  and  most  prom-
inent when  the  stomach  and  bowels  are  full.  I  have  seen  it  occur  in  pup-
pies, but  so  slight  that  I  did  not  do  anything  for  them,  it  doing  no  harm,
and  only  leaving  a  small  lump  that  was  never  noticed  as  they  grew  up,
the  hair  on  the  belly  hiding  it.  In  treating  puppies  for  it,  wait  till  they  are
weaned  and  separated  from  their  mother,  or  she  will,  with  her  tongue,
remove  or  displace  the  application.  Now  take  the  puppy  in  the  morn-
ing, before  his  breakfast,  when  bowels  are  empty,  lay  him  on  his  back  on
your  lap,  and  place  over  the  enlargement  a  pad  of  vulcanized  India  rubber  or
cork,  tapered,  the  smaller  end  being  applied  on  the  tumor  after  it  has  been
pressed  in,  and  the  pad  secured  by  strips  of  white  leather  smeared  with
warm  pitch  plaster,  well  stuck  to  the  belly  so  pup  can  not  scratch  it  off  with
its  feet.     A  cure  can  be  effected  in  a  few  weeks  if  the  pad  is  kept  in  place.
Here  is  a  case  that  was  prescribed  for  by  Dent:
"My  pointer  puppy,  ten  weeks  old,  strong  and  healthy,  has  a  rupture
right  under  its  belly,  near  the  ribs  and  about  the  size  of  a  very  large  pea.
Will  it  have  any  bad  effect  on  the  dog  after  being  cured?  Please  prescribe.
Ans. — These  navel  ruptures  frequently  disappear  with  age  and  seldom
cause  any  inconvenience.  If  you  want  to  operate  on  the  rupture,  lay  the
dog  on  his  back,  pinch  the  skin  up  over  the  opening  in  the  walls  of  the
abdomen  and  pass  two  pins  through  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  being
careful  not  to  puncture  the  intestines;  then  tie  a  silk  cord  around  the  skin
between  the  body  and  the  pins  and  allow  it  to  stay  there  until  it  sloughs
off."
Nephritis. — See  Kidneys,  Inflammation   of.
Obesity. — See  Fatness,  Excessive.
Ostitis  (Inflammation  of  the  Bone) This  is  generally  due  to  violence,
blows,  or  to  constitutional  disturbance,  like  rheumatism  or  scrofula.  Symp-
toms are  pain,  heat  and  swelling  of  the  skin  at  the  affected  part,  also  lame-
ness. Very  essential  in  such  cases  is  rest,  combined  with  hot  fomenta-
tions to  the  part  and  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine;  when  due  to  rheumatism,
the  systemic  treatment  recommended  under  Rheumatism,  should. be  adopt-
ed; and  should  there  be  an  enlargement  left  after  the  acute  inflammation
has  subsided,  the  part  should  be  painted  daily  with  tincture  of  iodine,  unless
soreness  is  produced,  when  this  treatment  should  cease  for  a  day  or  two.
Ozoena. — This  complaint  shows  itself  by  a  discharge  from  both  nos-
trils. The  causes  are  diseased  teeth,  protracted  catarrh,  causing  chronic
inflammation  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the  nose,  polypi,  or  inflammation
of  the  sinuses  of  the  nose,  due  to  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  that
organ.  Where  the  disease  is  due  to  decayed  teeth,  the  latter  should  be
extracted;  or  to  polypi,  these  should  be  removed.  The  nostrils  should  be
syringed  night  and  morning  with  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid;  or
the  tincture  of  hydrastis  is  often  useful — 1  part  of  tincture  to  equal  parts
of  water.     Exercise  and  fresh  air  are  very  necessary  to  recovery.
Poisoning. — A  dastardly  act  is  to  poison  a  dog,  and  no  punishment  is
too  severe  to  inflict  on  the  cowardly  cur  who  does  it.  If  I  could  have  my
way  about  it,  the  cur  that  poisons  a  dog  would  hang  by  the  neck  till  he
was  dead,  a  proper  punishment,  properly  fitting  the  crime.  If  you  are  so
unfortunate  as  to  have  your  dog  poisoned,  keep  your  eye  open  on  your
neighbors — who  perhaps  are  unfortunately  such  degenerates  that  they
do  not  like  dogs.  Bide  your  time,  but  never  give  up  trying  to  land  the
cur  who  poisoned  your  dog,  and  then,  if  you  can  not  have  positive  proof
enough  to  punish  him  or  her  legally,  try  some  other  plan  quietly,  and
never  give  up  until  you  have  in  some  way  punished  the  one  who  killed
your  dog.
I  am  devoting  considerable  space  to  this  subjett,  as  it  is  important,
and  advise  that  you  study  this  article  well,  so  that  if  you  are  so  unfortunate
as  to  ever  have  a  dog  poisoned,  you  may  know  what  to  do  promptly,  and
perhaps  save  your  dog.
It  may  be  of  service  to  some  readers  io  briefly  refer  to  a   few  of  the commoner  and  more  popularly  known  poisons  from  which  are  dogs  are
most  likely  to  suffer;  and  I  think  the  following  will  cover  the  majority
of  cases:  Arsenic,  cantharides,  carbolic  acid,  corrosive  sublimate,  phosphor-
ous and  strychnine.
As.  a  general  rule  for  distinguishing  between  the  evidence  of  poisoning
and  the  symptoms  of  disease,  the  suddenness  of  the  attack  must  weigh
largely;  while  by  tracing  where  the  dog  has  been,  and  what  he  has  or  is
likely  to  have  picked  up,  a  pretty  accurate  conclusion  may  be  arrived  at.
The  first  step  to  be  taken  in  most  cases  is  to  freely  empty  the  stomach
by  means  of  emetics  such  as  tartar  emetic,  sulphate  of  zinc,  ipecacuanha
wine,  one  of  the  most  useful  and  least  dangerous  to  use.  The  dose  is  from
3  drams  to  8  drams  in  a  little  warm  water.  If  none  of  these  are  at  hand,
by  drenching  with  lukewarm  water,  and  afterwards  giving  the  antidotes
indicated  if  procurable.
If  the  dog  suffer  much  pain,  a  dose  of  opium  or  laudanum  every  three
or  four  hours.  Where  gieat  depression  and  weakness  follow,  stimulants,
as  ether,  wine,  or  brandy,  should  be  given  in  small  quantities  at  frequent
intervals.
Arsenic  is  used  to  poison  rats,  mice  and  other  vermin;  in  this  way  it  is
frequently  met  with  in  and  about  country  houses.
Symptoms:  Great  heat  and  evident  pain  in  the  stomach  and  bowels,
sometimes  accompanied  with  swelling — the  belly  being  very  tender  to  the
touch — great  thirst,  frequent  vomiting  and  retching,  more  or  less  discharge
of  a  frothy  saliva,  and  frequent  evacuations  of  fluid,  dark  colored  matter,
often  marked  with  blood.  The  animal  soon  loses  muscular  power  to  a  great
extent,  showing  an  indisposition  to  move;  the  tongue,  lips,  etc.,  are  red  and
swollen,  and  the  breathing  is  more  and  more  labored  and  painful.
Antidotes:  Ferrugo  or  hydrated  sesquioxide  of  iron,  12  parts  of  which
combine  with  1  part  of  arsenic,  froming  an  insoluble  compound;  also  light
magnesia,  which  will  remove  l-25th  its  weight  of  arsenic  from  its  solution
in  water.
Cantharides  (Spanish  Fly). — This  is  given  by  ignorant  men  for  pur-
poses which  are  defeated;  but,  being  an  acrid,  irritant  poison,  it  produces
serious  results,  frequently  causing  inflammation  of  the  urinary  organs.
Symptoms:  Violent  thirst,  copious  discharge  of  bloody  mucous  from
the  stomach,  mixed  with  which  may  be  seen  the  shiny  green  particles  of
the  "flies;"  there  are  great  pains  in  the  loins  and  bowels,  swelling  and
inflammation  of  the  genital  organs,  and  bloody  stools  and  urine.
Antidotes:  An  emetic  should  at  once  be  resorted  to,  the  dog  should
afterwards  be  drenched  with  demulcents,  and  a  dose  of  opium  given  every
three  or  four  hours.
Carbolic  Acid — This  produces  baneful  effects,  even  by  absorption
through  the  pores  of  the  skin,  when  too  freely  used.  It  causes  great  pros-
tration, with   trembling  of  the  whole  frame.
Symptoms:  Extraordinary  depression  of  the  vital  powers,  general
shivering  and  almost  constant  trembling  of  the  limbs,  and  a  palsied  motion
of  the  head.     Bleeding  at  the  nose  is  a  frequent  symptom,  and  the  dis-
charges   from   the  bowels  are  also   often   stained   with   blood;    the   counte-
nance of  the  sufferer  is  expressive  of  a  most  helpless  and  painful  state.
Antidoes:  The  proper  treatment  consists  in  placing  the  dog  in  a  warm
bath,  using  friction  the  while,  and  administering  such  stimulants  as  am-
monia, ether,  brandy,  etc.,  in  water  or  gruel.
Corrosive  Sublimate  is  used  for  a  variety  of  purposes  about  farms,  al-
though for  most  of  these  it  must  be  admitted  a  non-poisonous  article  would
answer  as  well  or  better.  Corrosive  sublimate,  phosphorous  and  strych-
nine each  enters  into  the  composition  of  paste  and  powders  largely  sold  for
the  destruction  of  vermin,  and  it  is  when  so  used,  being  placed  on  bread
and  butter,  bits  of  meat,  etc.,  that  they  are  most  likely  to  be  picked  up  by
the  dog.
Symptoms:  Violent  vomiting  and  purging  of  stringy  and  offensive
matter,  the  belly  is  distended  and  painful  to  the  touch;  the  urine  suppress-
ed, cramp  and  twitches  are  noticeable  in  the  limbs,  and  frequently  paraly-
sis ensues.
Antidotes:  Tartar  emetic  as  an  emetic;  white  of  egg,  followed  imme-
diately by  infusion  of  galls;  milk  or  gluten  of  wheat.  Of  the  chemical  anti-
dotes, the  albumen  of  eggs  is  by  far  the  best;  the  white  of  one  egg  is
sufficient  to  neutralize  or  render  insoluble  4  gr.  of  solid  bichloride  of  mer-
cury.
Phosphorous. — Antidoes:  Calcined  magnesia,  with  diluents  and  de-
mulcents given  in  quantity.
Strichnine. — Symptoms:  Acute  pain,  causing  the  dog  to  utter  sharp
cries;  frequent  twitchings  and  jerkings  of  the  head  and  limbs,  the  fore  and
hind  legs  are  drawn  towards  each  other,  the  back  is  arched;  the  fits  of
cramp  and  twitching  are  intermittent,  but  are  readily  brought  on  by  a
touch  or  a  sudden  noise.  Foaming  at  the  mouth  is  another  and  frequent
symptom.
Antidotes:  Give  an  emetic  at  once,  mustard  and  hot  water,  coffee,  salt
and  hot  water;  give  lard,  or  any  fat,  in  considerable  quantities.
"The  following  has  saved  many  valuable  dogs  poisoned  by  strychnine
and  will  save  any  dog  if  breath  is  Left  in  body.  As  soon  as  the  owner  is
convinced  that  the  dog  has  strychnine,  or  dog  button  (nux  vomica),  symp-
toms of  which  are  readily  detected  by  spasms  and  rigid  spine,  give  fifteen
drops  of  homeopathy  tincture  of  belladonia  (green  root).  Give  same  dose
after  each  spasm.  If  dog  is  too  far  gone  to  swallow,  inject  thirty  drops  in
rectum.  The  second  dose  can  be  given  by  mouth.  It  is  seldom  the  third
dose  is  necessary."  This  I  copied  from  letter  sent  to  the  American  Field
by  some  sportsman  who  had  been  out  hunting  with  his  pointer.  He  fur-
ther wrote:  "When  I  reached  him  he  had  had  some  twelve  spasms  and  was
rigid,  tongue  cold,  eyes  turned,  etc.  Three  doses  brought  the  dog  out  and
some  thirty  quail  were  killed  over  him  the  next  day."
Here  are  also  other  antidotes  that  are  used  in  cases  of  poisoning:
Strychnine  is  most  commonly  used  to  poison  dogs,  and  if  noticed  when
taken  sick,  or  even  after  violent  convulsions  have  set  in,  they  can  almost
Invariably  be  saved  by  injecting  under  the  skin,  with  hypodermic  syringe,
LO  grain  doses  of  chloral  (dissolved  in  water)  every  15  or  20  minutes  until
50  or  60  grains  are  used.
If  convulsions  quiet  down  and  dog  seems  better,  it  might  be  safe  to  stop
when  30  or  40  grains  have  been  given.
It  will  pay  any  one  owning  a  number  of  dogs  to  keep  a  hypodermic
syringe.
Dent  says:  The  best  antidote  for  strychnine  poisoning  is  chloral  hy-
drate, size  of  dose  depends  upon  the  condition  of  the  dog;  in  health  the
done  is  5  to  20  grains.
Dog  poisoning  is  so  prevalent  in  many  parts  of  the  country  just  now,
it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  reproduce  part  of  Mr.  A.  J.  Sewell's  (the
noted  English  veterinarian)  article  on  this  subject  in  the  Kennel  Gazette
(Eng.),  so  that  dog  owners  may  be  prepared  for  such  emergencies:
"In  all  cases  of  poisoning,  more  especially  when  due  to  strychnia,
prompt  action  is  required  and  means  should  be  at  once  taken  to  make  the
dog  disgorge  what  has  been  swallowed.  An  emetic  that  will  act  well  and
quickly  must  be  at  once  administered;  for  this  there  is  nothing  better  than
a  dose  of  apomorphia.  This  medicine  acts  in  two  ways;  it  is  the  quickest
and  surest  emetic,  and  besides  it  relieves  the  spasms.  The  dose  is  the
eighth  of  a  grain  for  small  dogs,  and  about  the  quarter  of  a  grain  for
the  large  ones,  given  in  a  teaspoonful  of  water;  but  the  best  way  of  admin-
istering it  is  by  injecting  it  under  the  skin  with  a  hypodermic  syringe —
than  from  three  to  eight  minims  of  the  one  in  fifty  s'olutions  is  to  be  given.
"I  always  advise  persons  who  keep  a  number  of  valuable  dogs  to  have
a  solution  of  apomorphia  by  them  ready  for  emergency,  for  while  it  is  being
obtained  the  patient  may  die,  and  if  huntsmen  would  always  carry  a  small
bottle  of  solution  with  them,  many  a  valuable  hound's  life  might  be  saved.
When  this  medicine  is  not  at  hand  some  other  emetic  must  be  given.  Ordi-
nary table  salt  can  be  always  quickly  procured,  and  from  one  teaspoonful  to
a  tablespoonful,  according  to  the  size  of  the  dog,  should  be  given  in  warm
water.  If  the  dose  does  not  act  freely,  repeat  it  in  a  few  minutes,  or,  instead,
give  from  five  to  twenty  grains  of  powdered  ipecacuanha,  or  from  one  to
three  grains  of  tar  emetic.  Either  of  these  may  be  shaken  dry  on  the
tongue;  the  dog  must  be  made  to  vomit  somehow,  but  anything  like  salt
requiring  a  quantity  of  water  is  often  difficult  to  administer,  as  the  dog's
mouth  is  often  tightly  clenched  and  trying  to  open  it  induces  a  paroxysm,
during  which  time  it  is  impossible  to  give  anything  by  the  mouth,  and  here
the  advantage  of  the  subcutaneous  injection  of  apomorphia  comes  in.  This
may  also  be  repeated  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  if  the  vomiting  has  not  been
free.  Besides  the  emetic  some  medicine  is  necessary  to  relieve  the  spasm.
Fro  this  there  is  nothing  better  than  chloral  and  bromide  of  potassium.
From  fifteen  grains  to  two  scruples  of  each  may  be  given  in  from  one  to
three  tablespoonfuls  of  water  if  the  dog  can  be  made  to  swallow,  and  half
the  quantity  of  each  may  be  given  again  in  twenty  or  thirty  minutes  and
repeated,  if  necessary,  in  half  an  hour.  When  the  dog  is  unable  to  swal-
low, from  three  to  ten  minims  of  nitrite  of  amyl  held  to  the  nose  on  a
pocket  handkerchief  is  useful.  This  may  be  repeated  In  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  or  chloroform  may  be  given.  Also  inject  into  the  rectum  from  one-
half  to  two  drams  of  laudanum,  in  from  on  to  four  tablespoonfuls  of  water,
which  repeat  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  again  in  another  fifteen  ininuteS
if  the  paroxysms  continue.  After,  the  severe  symptoms  have  passed  and
the  dog  is  weak  and  prostrate,  from  one-half  to  two  teaspoonfuls  of  brandy
added  to  some  milk  may  be  administered  and  repeated  every  hour  for  a
time.)'
Ground  Glass. — The  symptoms  are  bloody  passages,  great  pain  and
distress,  and  vomiting  of  blood.  There  is  no  cure  for  this,  and  it  is  merciful
to  destroy  the  poor  animal  at  once,  ending  his  suffering  by  chloroforming.
I  now  conclude  this  article  by  giving  one  that  was  published  in  the
American  Stock-Keeper:
"Phosphorous  is  a  dangerous  poison,  and  will  be  got  from  rat-paste
which  is  left  lying  about,  spread  on  bread  and  butter.  For  this  give  an
emetic,  followed  by  a  draught  of  Magnesia  and  water.  Afterwards  milk
and  other  demulcents,  with  a  few  drops  of  laudanum  to  allay  pain.  Mer-
cury may  be  taken  in  several  forms — either  as  Calomel,  'White  Precipi-
tate,' or  'Corrosive  Sublimate' — all  of  which  are  accessible  to  dogs  at  var-
ious times.  Give  large  draughts  of  white  of  egg  beaten  up  with  water;  an
emetic  first.  Then  diet  on  milk  and  broth.  If  violent  purging,  give  a  little
laudanum.  Sulphate  of  copper  is  in  common  use  about  farms,  and  so  is
dangerous  to  dogs,  who  may  pick  up  and  devour  dead  birds  in  a  corn  field
in  which  the  seed  has  been  dressed  with  this  poison.  Its  antidotes  are
demulcents  (after  the  usual  emetic),  such  as  white  of  egg  and  milk,  and  a
little  laudanum  later.  It  "will  be  seen  from  the  forecoming  that  the  treat-
ment for  all  mineral  poisons  is  very  similar  all  round.
"Now,  as  to  vegetable  poisons,  or,  to  be  more  precise,  organic  poisons
(minerals  being  inorganic).  The  chief  of  these,  as  far  as  they  affect  dogs