ministration. This  dose  will  do  for  an  ordinary  sized  dog  from  a  setter
up  to  a  St.  Bernard.  Toy  dogs  like  a  pug  and  smaller  ones,  give  half
powder.
Falling  of  the  vagina  must  not  be  confounded  with  inversion  of  the
womb,  which  occasionally  happens  after  pupping,  and  which  can  only  be
safely  treated  by  a  qualified  veterinarian.
Pulse.— See  Temperature  and  Pulse.
Purging — Thig  is  a  symptom  in  many  diseases,  but  it  may  exist  simply
from  temporary  derangement  of  the  stomach,  or  from  some  irritating  sub-
stance taken  into  the  intestines,  in  which  cases  a  dose  of  castor  oil  and  extra
attention  to  diet  are  all  that  is  necessary.
Polypi.— Tumors  growing  on  some  mucous  membrane,  the  nose,  ear,
anus  or  vaginal  passage,  the  latter  most  common.  They  are  attached  by
a  stack  or  pedicle  varying  in  length  or  thickness,  red  in  color,  smooth  and
pear-shaped.  They  vary  in  size;  when  small  are  concealed  from  view,  but
protrude  as  they  grow.  A  mucous  matter,  tinged  with  blood  and  offensive
in  smell  is  sometimes  discharged.
Treatment  consists  in  their  removal  by  tying  a  strong  white  silk  thread
tightly  around  the  neck  of  the  polypi  till  the  neck  is  cut  through  and  the
tumor  drops  off.  They  can  also  be  removed  by  an  ecraseur,  an  instrument
made  for  this  purpose.  Bath*  the  parts  frtely  for  a  few  days  with  Goulard
Water.
Rheumatism — (This  article  was  written  especially  for  this  book  by
"Dent." — This  disease  may  affect  either  th«  joints,  In  which  casss  the  bones
are  often  affected,  or  the  muscles  themselves.  What  is  known  as  Lumbago,
in  which  the  back  and  hindquarters  are  affected,  and  the  dog  shows  evi-
dences of  the  most  intense  pain,  being  barely  able  to  move,  and  drags  his
hind  legs,  is  only  a  form  of  rheumatism.
The  same  can  be  said  of  those  common  diseases  popularly  referred  to
as  kennel  lameness,  or  chest-founder,  in  which  the  muscles  connecting  the
shoulder  blade  to  the  chest  are  affected,  and  the  animal  is  very  stiff  and
sore  In  front,  particularly  noticeable  when  running  down  hill.
The  cause  of  rheumatism  is  a  poisonous  acid  in  the  blood,  and  this
acid  is  produced  and  induced  by  a  bad  diet,  exposure  to  cold  winds,  damp-
ness, eeneral  neglect  and  exposures.
Svmntoms. — Pa;n,  stiffness,  soreness,  disordered  stomach,  difficulty  in
movlnar.  more  or  less  fever,  anxiety,  and  in  some  cases — swelling  of  the  joint.
Tn^i  (lire-iso  piqo  sh*ft3  from  one  location  to  another,  or  may  disappear  for
a  day  to  reappear  the  next  with   increased  severity.
Treatment. — Give   the  ftnlmal   warm,   comfortable   Quarters,   and   la
most  eases  a  warm  bath  will  give  relief,  using  care  to  see  that  the  animal  is
carefully  and  thoroughly  dried  after  bath.  If  it  is  still  in  great  pain  give
a  dose  of  Dover's  Powders,  and  if  necessary,  open  the  bowels  with  one
dose  of  the  following:
Class  1. —  (Adult  dogs,  5  to  12  lbs.) — Olive  oil,  one  teaspoonful;  cascara
sagrada,  fluid  ext.,  3  to  10  drops.
Class  2. —  (Adult  dogs,  12  to  20  lbs.)— Olive  oil,  one  tablespoonful;
cascara  sagrada,  fluid  ext.,   10   to  15  drops.
Class  3. —  (Adult  dogs,  20  to  40  lbs.) — Olive  oil,  one  ounce;  cascara
sagrada,  fluid  ext.,  15  to  30  drops.
Class  4. —  (Adult  dogs,  40  lbs.  and  over.) — Olive  oil,  one  or  two  ounces;
cascara  sagrada,  fluid  ext.,  30  to  60  drops.
The  above  doses  are  for  a  purgative  action.  As  a  gentle  laxative  give
one-half  the  above  doses  morning  and  evening.  Puppies,  two  months  old,
of  Classes  2,  3  and  4,  take  half  dose  of  Class  No.  1,  and  for  puppies  three
to  six  months  old  give  them  as  a  dose  half  of  Class  No.  2.
These  two  drugs  are  both  so  gentle  and  harmless  that  no  danger  fol-
lows their  use.  A  pup  six  months  old  can  take  nearly  as  much  medicine  as
an  adult,  while,  for  instance,  a  two  month  old  fox  terrier  will  take  nearly
as  much  at  a  dose  as  would  a  mastiff  or  Great  Dane  of  same  age.
After  having  given  above,  now. treat  patient  with  following  three  times
a  day:
Class  1.- — (Adult  dogs,  10  to  20  lbs.) — Salicylate  of  sodium,  3  grains;
quinine,  1  grain;  plienacetin,  1  grain.
Class  2.— (Adult  dogs,  20  to  40  lbs.)— Salicylate' of  sodium,  10  grains;
quinine,  2  grains;   plienacetin.  3  grains.
Class  3. —  (Adult  dogs.  40  up  to  150  lbs.) — Salicylate  of  sodium,  15
grains;   quinine,   3  grains;  phenacetin,  '5  grains.
Not  generally  used  for  pups  under  five  months,  but  from  five  up  to
ten  month- pups  use  one-half  above  doses;  over  ten  months,  dogs  of  breeds
of  first  two  classes  take  an  adult  dose.
In  some  cases  it  is  advisable  to  use  a  liniment.  The  best  one  for  this
purpose  is  a  combination  of  compound  camphor  liniment,  four  ounces;  and
aconite  liniment,  two  ounces.  Rub  it  well  into  the  affected  parts  for  at
least  half  an  hour,  then  wipe  dry  and  muzzel  the  an'mal  for  a  while,  to
prevent  his  licking  himself,  as  this  liniment  is  a  powerful  poison.  If  the
joints  are  very  severely  affected,  after  applying  the  liniment,  wrap  them
up  in  cotton  wool.
Feed  light,  easily  digested  foods;  vegetable  soups  with  boiled  rice,
oatmeal    or   corn   mush.
Here  are  a  couple  of  cases  that  were  prescribed  for:  "I  have  a  dog,  four
years  old,  that  seems  to  be  affected  in  a  peculiar  manner.  He  seems  stiff
all  over  his  body.  On  the  slightest  exertion  he  shows  great  pain,  and  by
simply  touching  him  it  seems  to  make  him  howl,  and  cry  dreadfullv.  He
has  been  showine  this  now  for  a  month  or  six  week?  "-A  -1-"'*  ^eem  to  be
improving.  Sometimes  when  he  ents  it  is  almost  impo--'1  le  for  him  to
move  his  head  up  or  down.  I  should  be  pleased  to  hear  from  you.  An*  —
Yonr  dog  has  muscular  rheumatism,  and  I  would  suggest  the  following
treatment:  Gire  interally  tincture  coleMmm  'n  15  dron  doses  three  times
dally.     There  tare  been  »  number  of  anti-rheumatic  agents  recommended
"""*
for  affections  of  this  kind,  but  so  far  some  of  them  have  not  proved  to  he
of  much  benefit.  Also,  in  connection  with  the  above  treatment  it  would
be  well  to  use  some  stimulating  embrocation,  rubbing  into  the  skin  thor-
oughly with  a  woolen  cloth.  This  should  be  used  once  daily.  Spirits  of  cam-
phor might  be  tried,  or  the  aconite  and  camphor  liniment  prescribed  by
Dent — the  poisonous  one."
"Please  prescribe  for  a  dog,  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  weight,  that
has  a  bad  case  of  rheumatism  in  the  stifle  joint,  the  third  attack  in  the  same
joint.  He  has  had  it  now  for  several  weeks  and  is  just  beginning  to  walk
on  that  leg  very  stiffly;  cannot  put  it  down  when  running.  I  am  afraid
Ihe  joint  will  be  permanently  stiffened.  Advise  me  as  to  treatment,  exer-
cise  and  feeding.  Ans. — Give  ten  grains  of  the.  salicylate  of  soda  and  two
grains  of  quinine  three  times  a  day,  hand  rub  the  joint  gently  three  times
a  clay  twenty  minutes  at  a  time;  feed  milk  and  stale  bread  and  a  very
little  meat;  keep  in  warm  quarters  and  do  not  expose  to  the  weather;  give
walking  exercise  on  pleasant  days  only."
Ribs,  Fracture  of. — This  injury,  which  is  not  uncommon  in  dogs,  is
usually  due  to  a  kick.  The  symptoms  are  pain  on  manipulating  the  part,
the  breathing  is  short,  the  ribs  are  more  or  less  fixed,  and  crepitus  can
be  heard  if  the  ear  is  applied  to  the  ribs.  The  ribs  should  be  bandaged
rather  tightly,  to  prevent  undue  expansion  of  the  chest  walls,  and  this  will
generally  effect  a  cure,  if,  however,  the  lungs  are  injured,  then  such  com-
plications as  pneumonia  or  pleurisy  may  arise.  A  mild  aperient  is  always
beneficial.
Ringworm. — Dogs  occasionally  have  this,  due  to  a  vegetable  parasite.
It  is  a  round,  scaly  patch,  very  contagious,  and  also  due  to  dirty,  damp
kennels,  but  could  be  communicated  to  the  dog  from  a  child  who  was  playing
with  it.  The  best  treatment  is  a  little  of  the  ointment  of  iodide  of  iron,
well  rubbed  in  twice  a  day,  prepared  as  follows:  1  dram  of  iodide  of  iron
to  7  drams  of  spermaceti  ointment;  mix.  My  Skin  Cure  will  also  cure
this  trouble.  Another  remedy  is  yellow  oxide  of  mercury,  15  grains,  and
benzoated  lard,  1  ounce.  Another  is  oleate  of  copper,  one  part  to  lard  four
parts,  which  will  cure  it  up.
Rickets. — Dalziel  says  of  Rickets:
"Pups,  the  offspring  of  an  enfeebled  clam  yielding  an  insufficient
supply  of  milk,  and  that  of  poor  quality,  or  those  that  are,  from  any  cause,
ill  fed  and  neglected  or  kept  in  close,  ill-ventilated  places,  without  a  chance
of  fresh  air  and  needful  exercise,  suffer  from  mis-shapen  limbs,  thick  joints
and  other  deformities,  caused  by  the  bones  being  imperfectly  developed,
the  food,  and  other  conditions  on  which  the  pup  is  reared,  not  yielding
the  constituents  necessary  to  give  them  the  required  hardness  to  enable
them  to  perform  their  proper  functions.  This  state  is  known  as  rickets,
and  the  cause  being  plain,  the  treatment  is  evident.  Continuous  in-and-in
breeding  is  one  cause  of  rickets.
"Do  not  attempt  to  rear  a  pup  on  a  weakly,  unhealthy  mother,  but  if
tbe  breed  Is  desired,  procure  for  the  pups  a  fostor-motner  of  undoubted
health  and  stamina;  let  the  nest  be  in  a  warm,  airy  place,  and  as  soon
as  the  pups  are  able  to  leave  the  nest  let  them  have  plenty  of  room,  fresh
air,  warmth,  and  sunshine,  if  possible,  and  insure  thorough  cleanliness
of  the  place  in  which  they  are  kept.  When  old  enough  to  eat,  let  their  diet
bo  light,  nourishing  and  digestible,  and  rickets  will  be  avoided.  In  cases
where  rickets  already  exist  attend  to  the  above  suggestions;  let  a  con-
.  siderable  portion  of  the  diet  consist  of  good  milk,  to  which  add  a  little
lime  water,  say  a  tablespoonful  to  every  quarter  pint,  and  give  in  the  food
small  doses  of  cod  liver  oil  twice  a  day  for  some  months."
The  following  is  from  "Notes  for  Novices,"  published  in  the  American
Stockkeeper:
"A  great  deal  has  been  said  and  written  on  the  subject  of  rickets  in
puppies.  In  a  great  many  cases  the  trouble  is  brought  on  by  allowing
them  to  play  and  roll  about  at  an  early  age  on  a  brick  floor.  If  it  is
r.fressary  to  keep  puppies  in  a  house  with  brick  floor  it  should  be  covered
©ver  with  movable  boards,  under  which  is  a  layer  of  disinfected  sawdust,
so  a^   to  prevent  the  propagation   of  insects.
"As  an  internal  remedy  for  puppies  which  are  rickety,  nothing  is  much
better  than  Parrish's  Chemical  Food,  which  contains  iron  and  other  phos-
phates and  must  improve  the  state  of  the  bone  system.  Cod  liver  oil  emul-
sion with  hypophosphites  is  also  excellent,  and  alternate  doses  of  each
may  be  given  with  benefit.
"The  use  of  liniments  depend  on  circumstances.  If  the  leg  weakness  is
caused  by  the  puppy  having  been  kept  on  a  brick  floor,  as  suggested,  it  is
possible  to  put  matters  all  right  again  by  the  use  of  liniment  only.  But
if  due  to  phvsical  weakness,  less  Will  depend  upon  external  application
than  upon  internal  remedies  given,  and  general  dieting  and  management.
As  a  good  all-round  liniment  there  is  nothing  better  than  ordinary  hartshorn
and  oil  liniment,  with  a  liberal  allowance  of  turpentine."
Dent  prescribes  as   follows:
"What  is  the  matter  with  my  St.  Bernard  puppy,  six  months  old?  H«
walks  like  a  person  would  with  rheumatism;  it  all  seems  to  be  in  his
forelegs;  he  followed  my  buggy  one  day  and  got  very  warm,  and  then  got
very  wet.  He  is  quite  large  and  fleshy,  weight  one  hundred  and  ten  pounds?
Ans. — Rickets;  give  him  a  dessertspoonful  of  precipitated  phosphate  of  lime
in  his  food  three  times  a  day!  also  feed  him  four  ounces  of  lean  beef
daily,  and  egg  shells  finely  broken  up  and  mixed  in  with  his  soft  food."
The  following  was  published  in  Field  and  Fancy,  in  reply  to  request
from  a  subscriber — written  by  Dr.  O.  V.  Brumley,  Professor  of  Canine
Diseases  of  the  College  of  Veterinary  Department,  State  University  of  Ohio:
"What  is  the  cause  of  rickets?  I  have  two  puppies  that  have  rickets
now,  are  quite  valuable  ones,  and  would  like  to  save  them  if  possible.  They
first  commenced  to  show  evidences  of  the  disease  about  two  months  ago,
and  now  one  of  them  has  peculiar  enlargements  around  the  joints  on  the
front  limbs,  also  on  its  face,  which  gives  it  a  very  peculiar  appearance.  The
other  one  is  not  quite  so  bad  yet,  but  seems  to  be  getting  worse  all  the
time.      Could  you  suggest  anything  that  would  help  them?
"There  has  been  a  great  many  theories  advanced  in  regard  to  the
cause  of  this  disease,  and  in  many  instances  they  do  not  seem  to  be  en-
tirely  satisfactory.  Among  the  many  things  that  have  been  mentioned  an
the  cause  of  rhachitis,  the  following  will  suffice  at  this  time:  A  deficiency  of
lime-salts  as  a  consequence  of  disturbances  of  digestion;  excessive  forma-
tion of  carbonic  acid  or  lactic  acid,  which  would  dissolve  the  lime-salts;  an
alteration  of  the  general  nutritive  condition  on  account  of  abnormal  influ-
ences in  young  animals;  enlargement  and  an  increase  in  the  number  and
size  of  blood  vessels  in  the  bone  tissues,  so  that  the  lime-salts  continue  to
circulate  in  the  blood  instead  of  being  deposited  in  the  bones.  It  might
be  well  to  mention  that  at  the  present  time  the  exact  cause  of  this  disease
is  not  known,  but  we  do  know,  however,  that  rickets  can  be  developed  in
the  dog  by  deficient,  improper  food,  by  want  of  nitrogenous  food,  and  espe-
cially bones,  as  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  animals  with  this  disease  if
given  these  articles  of  diet  seem  to  improve  in-  a  short  time.  This  disease
generally  makes  its  appearance  in  young  animals  in  the  first  few  months
of  their  lives,  and  for  this  reason  also  it  is  very  often  spoken  of  as  heredi-
tary. The  disease  seems  to  develop  relatively  in  proportion  to  their  growth;
if  the  animal  grows  quickly,  the  disease  will  appear  quicKly,  if  growth  is
slow,   the  disease  will  come  on  gradually.
SPECIAL.  EXPERIMENTAL  TO  PROVE  THE  MENDELIAN  LAWS.
In  calling  the  attention  of  our  readers  to  the  advertisement  of  the
STERLING  COLLIE  KENNELS  we  do  so  with  special  pleasure  because  of
the  personal  knowledge  that  we  have  of  the  kennel  and  owner.  The
STERLING  COLLIE  KENNELS  has  been  in  existence  for  the  past  six  years
and  has  held  a  pronent  place  in  the  breeding  and  exhibiting  of  collies  in
this  country.  Just  now  this  kennel  doing  some  special  experimental  breed-
ing work,  endeavoring  to  prove  the  Mendelian  laws  of  heridity  on  their
collies,  with  the  result  that  dogs  of  a  fixed  type  and  color  are  being  pro-
duced with  a  degree  of  certainty  that  we  have  not  heard  of  before  and  much
good  is  being  done  for  the  breed.  Get  in  touch  with  this  kennel  If  you  are
interested  in  collies.
"This  disease  is  a  peculiar  disturbance  of  the  bones  of  the  whole
System,  and  seems  to  be  a  deficiency  of  lime-salts  in  the  bones,  making
them  solft  and  flexible.  The  bones  become  soft  enough  so  that  they  can
be  cut  easily  with  a  knife,  and  the  ends  of  the  bones  become  much  thick-
ened, which  accounts  for  the  peculiar  enlargements  mentioned  abor«.
It  is  very  often  that  the  enlargements  make  their  appearance  on  the  bones
of  the  face,  which  gives  the  animal  that  peculiar  expression.  Deformed
and  distorted  bones  are  very  frequent  occurrences  in  this  disease,  especially
noticeable  in  the  limbs,  which  no  doubt  comes  from  the  weight  of  the
animal  at  the  time  the  bones  are  soft.  The  disease  as  a  rule  is  chronic,  and  it
takes  a  long  course  of  treatment  to  bring  them  to  a  normal  condition
again,  and  very  often  the  treatment  is  not  satisfactory.  I  have  in  mind  a
case  now  that  entirely  recovered  from  the  disease,  but  it  was  a  mild  one,  and
was  treated  before  the  bones  were  much  deformed.  If  the  disease  is  taken
early,  it  may  be  checked  by  means  of  proper  feding;  but  when  the  de-
formity is  once  formed,  it  is  only  in  extremely  rare  cases  that  it  does  not
STERLING  COLLIE  KENNELS
(REGISTERED)
STERLING  IN  NAME  AND  QUALITY
SCIENTIFIC    BREEDING
In  breeding  animals,  practically
any  desired  result  can  be  obtain-
ed if  the  facts  and  factors  in-
volved, are  known.  I  am  breed-
ing collies  scientifically — to  get
them  true  to  type,  color  and  mark-
ings. In  my  effort  to  solve  the
problem  of  color  inheritance  I  am
using  white,  sable,  blue  and  tri-
color collies.  You  can  help  by
sending  me  reports  of  the  off-
spring of  registered  matings  in-
volving their  use.
show   as    the   animal    grows    to    an    adult   age.      It   very    frequently    leaves
them   'bowlegged,'   or  with   twisted  limbs.
"I  would  suggest  that  you  feed  plenty  of  nitrogenous  food,  such  as
meat,  and  encourage  digestion  as  much  as  possible.  Give  bones,  and  per-
haps it  would  be  well  to  give  small  amount  of  lime  water  to  drink.  In  the
medicinal  treatment  use  syrups  calci  locto-phosphatis,  in  thirty  drop
doses,  once  daily."
Septicemia  Puerperalis,  and  Inflammation  of  the  Uterus. — "This  is
common  in  bitches,  and  is  the  result  of  retention  and  putrefaction  of  a
dead  fetus  (pup,)  or  the  introduction  of  putrid  matter  through  the  blood
stream.  The  symptoms  are  high  fever,  the  nose  and  mouth  are  hot,  the
pulse  is  quick,  the  respirations  are  increased,  the  eyes  are  injected,  the  ex-
tremities become  cold,  and  often  insensibility  and  death  occur.
"If  the  treatment  is  to  be  of  any  avail  it  must  be  adopted  at  once.
First,  remove  the  cause,  if  possible,  inject  the  uterus  with  warm,  weak
Gondy's  Fluid,  and  give  immediately  10  grains  to  20  grains  of  the  hypo-
sulphite of  soda,  in  water  three  times  a  day.  Creasote  given  in  1  grain  to
3  grain  doses  (made  into  a  pill  with  a  crumb  of  bread),  three  times  a
day  is  useful;  salicylate  of  soda  is  also  recommended  in  10  grains  to  0
grains  doses,  in  water,  three  times  a  day.  The  bowels  must  be  relaxed  by
means  of  doses  of  oil,  and  soap  and  water  enemas.  The  kennel  must  be
thoroughly  cleansed  and  sanitary,  the  drains  well  flushed  and  a  good  clean
bed  provided.  The  patient  must  have  warmth  with  plenty  of  fresh  air.  The
food  must  be  light,  such  as  beef  tea  and  mutton  broth,  with  crumbled  stale
bread.  As  the  animal  approaches  convalescence,  1  grain  to  2  grains  of
sulphate  of  quinine  may  be  given  with  advantage."
The  above  is  Dalziel's  treatment.  In  lieu  of  the  quinine  during  con-
valescence I  would  use  Clayton's,  Sergeant's  or  Dent's  Condition  Pills.
Sarcoptie  Mange. — See   Mange.
Scalds — See  Burns.
Scurf,  or  Crusty  Ears — This  comes  from  want  of  attention  to  the  skin,
but  often  appears  on  the  ears  as  a  forerunner  of  canker,  in  which  case  wash
with  warm  water  and  anoint  with  olive  oil.  Give  the  dog  a  dose  of  physic,
and  feed  on  a  light  diet  for  a  few  days.  If  you  will  put  my  Skin  Cure
on  these  crusty  ears  twice  a  day,  rub  on  well  both  sides,  which  softens  up
the  crusty  and  scaly  edges  and  flaps  of  the  ear.  then  gently  scrape  off  what  is
loosened,  with  your  fingers — in  a  few  days  the  ears  will  be  cured.  This
is  my  treatment,  and  it  always  works.  The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  my
Skin  Cure,  containing  nine  ingredients,  carefully  blended  and  mixed,  will
just  about  take  proper  care  of  any  skin  trouble  that  a  dog  has.  Each
eight  ounce  bottle  is  mixed  and  prepared,  just  the  one  at  a  time,  this
be-ng  necessary  in  order  to  get  the  different  ingredients  properly  blended,
and  connot  be  made  in  bulk.  It.  sells  for  the  same  price  as  any  other  skin
remedy  but.  with  all  due  regard  to  the  virtues  of  Glover's,  Gent's,  Clay-
ton's and  Spratt's — which  are  all  good—mine  is  just  simply  better.     I've
used  all  the  others,  and  they  do  the  work,  if  used  as  per  directions,  but
— I  like  my  own  the  best.  The  price  is  Fifty  Cents  for  full  eight  ounce
bottle,  and  can  only  go  by  express.
Salivation  is  caused  by  administration  of  overdoses  of  medicines  in
which  mercury  figures.  Mercurial  salts  are  in  many  skin  remedies — a  great
mistake — as  the  mercury  will  absorb  through  the  skin.  Symptoms  of  mer-