on  chain  in  dry  quarters.  (2)  Tablets  regularly  given  and  constant  care.
(3)  The  seton  promptly  put  in  before  the  case  has  advanced  to  the  fatal
or  acute  form  of  the  disease.  Distemper  in  itself  is  not  fatal,  but  the  com-
plications and  collateral  developments  it  leads  to  are.  Whoever  faithfully
follows  the  suggestions  given  in  this  article  need  have  no  fear  of  any  fatal
results  from  distemper.  The  ideas  herein  formulated  are  but  the  result
of  years  of  practical  experience  of  varying  results  with  young  setters.
Common  sense  is  the  underlying  principle  of  it  all,  which  after  all,  if  used
in  time,  is  far  better  than  medicine.  We  hear  of  all  kinds  of  "cures,"
including  those  who  still  have  faith  in  "coffee,"  the  pellet  of  "buckshot,"
or  dose  of  "gunpowder,"  together  with  other  harsher  specifics  and  meth-
ods of  treatment.  Should  we  not  give  our  priceless  clogs,  whose  value
every  year  is  increasing  with  their  educated  usefulness  and  close  com-
panionableness,  the  benefit  of  up-to-date  intelligent  care,  rather  than  the
"guess  at  it"  methods  of  the  past?
"Modestly  submitted  for  the  benefit  of  somebody's  faithful  dog,  some-
time,  somewhere."
The  following  very  complete  and  exhaustive  article  on  Distemper  was
written  especially  for  this  book  by  Dr.  George  W.  Clayton:
Distemper.
"History. — The  disease  now  known  as  canine  distemper  made  its  ap-
pearance at  a  very  early  period.  According  to  Laosson,  it  was  known  at
the  time  of  Aristotle,  and  the  epizootic  that  invaded  Bohemia  during  the
year  1028  and  decimated  the  canine  species  of  that  country  is  now  known
to  have  been  canine  distemper.  It  made  its  appearance  in  England  and
on  the  Continent  of  Europe  during  the  Seventeenth  Century,  first  in  Spain,
and  traveled  from  there  to  the  other  countries.  It  appeared  in  England
and  France  about  1740,  in  Germany  in   1748,  in  Italy  about  1764,  and  in
Russia  in  1770.  Distemper  now  exists  all  over  the  world  wherever  the  dog
is  found.  From  the  time  of  its  first  appearance  it  has  been  considered  one
of  the  most  fatal  diseases  to  which  the  dog  is  subject.
"Definition. — Distemper  is  an  acute  contagious  disease,  caused  by  the
introduction  of  a  specific  poison  into  the  system.  It  has  been  known  under
various  names.  Opinions  differ  as  to  its  nature.  Some  authors  have  com-
pared it  to  typhoid  or  typhus  in  man,  others  to  variola.  A  number  of  dif-
ferent authors  describe  it  as  a  catarrhal  fever,  as  it  affects  all  the  mem-
branes of  the  body.  The  nervous  system  is  generally  if  not  always  involved,
and  there  is  also  a   characteristic  skin   eruption.
"Causes. — That  a  germ  constitutes  the  exciting  cause  of  distemper  we
are  convinced  by  recent  investigations.  Some  authorities  believe  there  may
be  several  germs  or  different  forms  of  the  same  germ.  As  the  disease  is
very  highly  contagious,  clearly  defined,  and  well  characterized,  the  exis-
tence of  a  specific  germ  must  be  conceded.  According  to  this  theory
the  spontaneous  origin  of  distemper  is  not  tenable,  and  that  the  disease
may  be  perpetuated  and  continued  in  existence,  there  must  be  a  continued
propagation  of  the  poison,  and  a  continual  transmission  of  this  poison.
"The  poison  exists  in  the  air  in  a  fixed  and  volatile  state,  and  enters
the  system  by  the  nose  and  mouth.
"The  virus  can  be  communicated  from  one  animal  to  another,  and
transmission  by  cohabitation  is  more  easily  effected  than  by  inoculation.
"The  germ  has  great  vitality  and  great  power  of  resistance.  It  may
undergo  dessication  in  the  air  and  still  retain  its  virulence.  It  can  exist
a  long  time  outside  the  body  without  destruction,  and  communicate  the
disease  when  brought  into  contact  with  susceptible  individuals.
"It  has  been  found  that  the  virulent  properties  of  the  germs  are  not
lost  in  any  degree  when  dried  at  a  normal  temperature,  or  when  exposed
to  a  temperature  of  20  degrees  Centigrade,  but  does  lose  some  of  its  power
if  preserved  in  a  dray  state  and  kept  for  any  length  of  time.
"Under  proper  conditions  the  poison  of  distemper  can  reproduce  itself
without  limit.
"The  blood  of  the  affected  animal  has  been  found  to  be  contagious;
also  the  secretions  from  the  eyes  and  nose.
"Vaccination  of  young  animals  by  means  of  the  secretory  fluid  from
animals  affected  with  the  disease  has  been  tried  and  has  produced  the  dis-
ease artificially.  The  disease  when  produced  from  vaccination  generally
runs  a  mild  course.  The  liability  of  dogs  to  contract  distemper  is  not  the
same  at  all  ages,  and  under  all  circumstances  and  conditions.  Old  dogs
have  a  greater  chance  of  escape,  this  being  more  a  disease  of  youth.
Young  animals  generally  contract  the  disease  jn  the  course  of  their  first
year.  Sometimes  whole  litters  of  puppies  being  carried  off  by  it.  Some
animals  seem  to  possess  immunity  from  the  malady,  and  one  attack  suc-
cessfully overcome  produces  immunity  from  another.  In  very  rare  cases
there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule.  Distemper  is  found  in  all  localities,  and
at  all  seasons,  in  the  country  it  may  be  more  rife  at  some  seasons  than
others,  but  in  large  cities  it  exists  permanently.
"Predisposing  Causes. — In  distemper,  as  in  all  similar  diseases,  there
are  predisposing  causes.  Anything  that  weakens  the  constitution,  or  that
tends  to  debilitate,  or  lessen  the  animal's  resisting  power  would  be  pre-
disposing causes.  An  animal  that  has  a  weakened  constitution  inherited
from  the  sire  or  dam,  from  any  cause,  for  instance  from  in-breeding,  in-
judicious mating,  or  from  diseased  parents.  We  will  say,  then,  that  age,
environment,  condition  of  the  constitution  at  the  time  of  exposure,  indi-
viduality, etc:,  are  all  important.  The  sudden  alteration  in  the  environ-
ment, like  a  change  of  weather,  or  of  feeding,  exposure  to  damp  and  cold,
exhaustion,  a  long  journey,  the  exciting  and  unnatural  conditions  of  shows
generally,  with  the  crowding  together  of  large  numbers  of  dogs  that  have
lived  under  different  conditions,  etc.,  badly  drained,  ill-ventilated  kennels
with  insufficient  disinfecting  and  feeding,  poor  food  or  over  feeding,  and
too  little  exercise,  are  all  favorable  to  the  spread  of  the  disease.
"Animals  Affected — Distemper  is  found  in  the  dog,  cat,  fox,  wolf,
hyena,  prairie  dog  and  monkey.
"Clinical  Symptoms. — Symptoms  of  canine  distemper  are  manifold  and
rather  complicated.  They  involve  the  ocular,  respiratory  and  digestive  mu-
cous membranes;  also  the  nervous  system  and  outer  integument  of  skin.
For  the  purpose  of  description  we  will  divide  them  under  the  following
different  heads:
"Symptoms  of  Commencement. — The  period  of  incubation  is  usually
from  four  to  fourteen  days.  Elevation  of  temperature  is  the  first  symptom
noticeable  in  this  disease.  The  next  symptom  that  will  be  noticed  is  some
disturbance  in  the  general  condition.  The  animal  will  seem  to  be  chilly
and  have  shivering  spells,  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  skin  is  hard  and
the  hair  becomes  harsh  and  dry.  The  animal  loses  his  appetite,  is  restless
and  seems  depressed,  and  soon  tires  on  slight  exertion.  Vomiting  may
occur.
"Symptom  on  the  Outer  Integument. — There  is  sometimes  a  charac-
teristic skin  eruption  in  distemper.  The  eruption  generally  occurs  on  the
inner  facia  of  the  thighs,  and  on  the  abdomen,  or  it  may  cover  the  whole
body.  It  first  appears  as  small  red  spots,  generally  scattered.  Sometimes,
but  very  rarely,  they  are  confluent,  then  there  is  a  change  and  they  appear
as  small  blisters  filled  with  serum,  and  later  on  this  changes  to  pus.  They
are  about  the  size  of  a  small  bean,  then  dry  up  very  soon  and  form  yellow-
ish scabs  and  crusts.  These  scabs  fall  off  and  leave  a  red,  circular  spot  on
the  skin,  and  these  spots  are  some  time  in  disappearing.  Sometimes  pit
and  ulcerations  are  formed,  on  account  of  the  dog  scratching  these  spots.
Occasionally  this  trouble  is  only  slight  and  confined  to  parts  of  the  body,
but  at  times  it  extends  over  the  whole  surface  of  th«  bodr.     When   the
trouble  is  very  extensive  there  is  a  fetid  odor  given  off  from  the  body,  the
hair  falling  off  in  places.  Occasionally  a  slight  skin  eruption  is  the  only
symptom  that  is  observed,  but  in  these  cases  the  disease  is  of  a  very  mild
form.
"Symptoms  Shown  by  the  Eyes. — In  the  majority  of  cases  there  is  a
catarrhal  conjunctivitis.  The  eye  watery,  the  eyelids  injected,  the  con-
junctiva is  red  and  swollen,  and  as  the  light  cause's  the  animal  pain  he
seeks  the  dark.  At  first  the  exudate  is  serious,  later  on  it  becomes  mucous,
and  still  later  on  it  becomes  purulent,  in  color  light  gray  or  yellowish.  This
discharge  collects  in  the  corner  of  the  eye  or  runs  down  over  the  face,
forms  yellowish  crusts  on  the  edges  of  the  eyelids,  and  very  frequently
glues  the  lids  together  during  the  night.  Lesions  of  the  cornea  may  be
caused  by  the  corrosive  action  of  the  secretion,  and  the  resulting  inflam-
mation of  the  surrounding  membranes.  The  animal  scratching  and  rubbing
the  parts  producing  further  injury.  Nutritive  troubles  which  follow  also
assist.  There  is  at  first  a  slight  swelling  which  afterward  forms  an  ulcer-
ation. After  this  process  has  ceased  and  healing  takes  place  there  is  left
white  spots  or  dark  pigmentation  on»  the  cornea.  The  inflammation  may
extend  when  the  whole  eye  becomes  acutely  inflamed  and  breaks  down.
The  eye  symptom  accompanied  by  a  fever  is  sometimes  the  only  symptoms
of  the  disease.
"Respiratory  Symptoms. — There  is  usually  an  inflammation  of  the
mucous  membrane  of  the  air  passages  of  a  catarrhal  nature.  We  have,
first,  catarrh  of  the  nose,  marked  by  sneezing,  and  the  animal  will  rub
or  wipe  his  nose  with  his. paws.  There  is  generally  an  increasing  discharge
from  both  nostrils,  at  first  serous,  then  mucous,  and  later  on  purulent,  and
generally  quite  an  odor  to  this  discharge.  There  is  a  sniffling  respiration.
The  nose  sometimes  dry  and  cracked,  and  ulceration  covering  the  membranes
of  the  nasal  fossa.  When  the  discharge  is  very  profuse  the  trouble  extends
to  the  turbinated  bones  and  sinuses.  In  catarrh  of  the  larynx  we  have
a  loud,  hoarse,  dry  cough,  which  causes  the  animal  a  great  deal  of  dis-
comfort. Later  on  it  becomes  moist  and  looser,  and  there  is  usually  a
discharge.  On  account  of  reflex  action  this  cough  sometimes  produces  vom-
iting. There  is  not  much  difficulty  in  respiration  when  the  larynx  alone
is  affected,  but  when  the  bronchial  tubes  become  involved  and  the  inflam-
mation extends  downward  and  produces  bronchitis,  there  is  a  very  great
increase  in  respiration,  and  a  very  painful,  distressing  cough.
"Symptoms  of  the  Digestive  Tract. — In  catarrh  of  the  stomach,  which
occurs  in  this  disease,  there  is  generally  complete  loss  of  appetite,  and  the
animal  vomits  a  frothy  liquid.  There  is  a  fetid  diarrhea,  or  infrequent
defecation  and  intense  thirst.  The  discharge  from  the  bowels  is  of  a
liquid  consistency,  generally  muco-purulent,  and  may  be  streaked  with
blood,  while  the  abdomen  will  be  found  to  be  very  painful  on  pressure.
"Nervous  Symptoms. — The  animal's  senses  are  very  dull  and  he  seems
much  depressed.  There  may  be  deep  coma,  or  periods  of  excitement  occur,
nervousness  and  delirium;  these  periods  generally  short,  terminating  in
depression.  There  may  be  twitching  of  the  muscles,  especially  of  the
head  and  limbs.  At  times  there  is  twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  lower
jaw  that  causes  the  saliva  to  foam;  again  there  will  be  only  a  chatter-
ing of  the  teeth.  The  animal  will  wander  without  aim,  or  run  around
as  if  lost.  A  haggard  appearance  of  the  eyes,  the  head  thrown  backward,
the  animal  perhaps  having  convulsions.  There  may  be  motor  paralysis,
the  animal  unsteady  in  its  actions,  may  drag  his  legs  or  there  may  be
loss  of  power  in  the  posterior  extremities,  the  animal  being  unable  to  stand.
There  is  sometimes  loss  of  control  of  the  bladder  and  lower  bowel,  when
the  urine  and  feces  are  involuntarily  evacuated.  When  an  animal  is  in
a  poor  state  of  health,  being  aenemic  and  in  a  generally  run  down  condi-
tion, he  is  generally  attacked  with  very  severe  nervous  symptoms.  Serious
weakness  of  the  heart  may  occur.  Some  constitutions  seem  to  succumb
easily,  while  others  seem  to  withstand  more  acute  attacks.
"Complications. — Gome   of   the  complications  that   occur  in   distemper
are  capilliary  bronchitis,   pneumonia,   diarrhea,     jaundice,      paralysis,  and
worst  of  all,  chorea.
"Diagnosis. — When  the  animal  is  dull,  has  a  poor  appetite,  and  loses
flesh  rapidly,  the  disease  should  be  suspected,  especially  if  there  has  been
exposure  to  the  disease.  The  harsh  dry  cough  is  characteristic,  and  the
eye  symptoms  when  accompanied  by  fever  are  diagnostic  of  this  disease.
The  thermometer  should  be  used  in  these  cases.
"Prognosis, — The  prognosis  of  distemper  we  regard  as  favorable  if
the  case  is  seen  early  and  properly  treated.  The  danger  increases  with
the  severity  of  the  symptoms  at  the  onset  of  the  disease.  A  persistent
high  temperature,  or  a  subnormal  temperature  are  both  serious  symptoms.
The  following  are  unfavorable  occurrences:  Much  emaciation  and  the
animal  refuses  food,  or  when  there  are  grave  complications  such  as  pneu-
monia, etc.,  or  when  the  animal  is  very  young  or  weak,  and  senemic,  or
when  the  disease  attacks  different  organs  at  the  same  time.  Death  may
occur  from  paralysis  of  the  brain  or  oedema  of  the  lungs,  from  septicaemia
or  from  general  exhaustion.  Among  the  favorable  circumstances  are  the
mature  age  of  the  patient,  good  constitution  of  the  animal,  mildness  of
the  attack,  and  when  the  disease  is  confined  to  circumscribed  regions,  or
to  one  organ  of  the  body.
"Prophylaxis. — Due  attention  to  hygienics  is  one  of  the  most  impor-
tant considerations.  It  is  a  good  plan  to  have  a  small  kennel  or  room
where  there  will  be  plenty  of  fresh  air  without  draught  into  which  cases
of  suspected  distemper  may  be  put  under  observation,  housing  all  distem-
per cases  during  the  whole  course  of  the  illness  in  a  separate  kennel  or
room.  Everything  that  has  been  about  the  animal  and  all  quarters  where
the  animal  has  been  should  be  burned  if  possible.  If  it  is  not  desirable  to
burn  the  quarters  there  should  be  a  thorough  disinfecting  of  them,  and
especially  all  bedding  burned.  All  utensils  that  have  been  used  in  con-
nection with  the  case,  such  as  feeding  and  drinking  pans,  should  be  thor-
oughly disinfected.  A  dog  with  distemper  should  not  be  allowed  to  mingle
with  others,  however  well  he  may  seem,  so  long  as  he  has  any  discharge
from  eyes  or  nose,  and  never  before  from  four  to  eight  weeks  have  elapsed.
Then,  after  the  nose  and  eyes  have  been  especially  disinfected  by  washing
or  injecting  a  suitable  solution,  the  animal  should  be  washed  all  over,  the
water  being  medicated  with  Clayton's  Ceoline  Dog  Wash,  Sanitas,  or  the
Standard  Disinfectant.  As  an  animal  in  a  run-down,  debilitated  condi-
tion will  contract  distemper  more  easily  than  one  in  perfect  health,  it  is
essential  that  the  animal  be  kept  in  as  perfect  health  as  possible.  As  all
dogs  are  subject  to  constipation,  especially  if  confined  in  the  house,  his
bowels  should  be  seen  to  and  kept  open,  and  there  is  nothing  so  good  for
this   purpose   as    Clayton's   Laxative   Pills.
"Pathological  Anatomy. — Lesions  of  the  respiratory  tract  are  as  fol-
lows: The  pituitary  membrane  or  lining  membrane  of  the  nasal  fossa  is
injected,  infiltrated  and  covered  with  a  muco-purulent  exudate;  numerous
eccymosecl  spots  are  found  on  the  membrane.  The  mucous  membrane  of
the  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi  shows  various  inflammatory  alterations.
The  large  bronchi  are  filled  with  bloody  mucous,  the  smaller  filled  with
a  thick,  tenacious  exudate.  The  pleura  is  covered  with  a  rose  or  citron
colored  exudate.  The  bronchial  lymphatics  are  infiltrated,  tumefied,  and
in  rare  cases  purulent.  The  surface  of  the  lungs  are  covered  with  red
spots  and  the  lungs  are  collapsed  or  distended  with  air.  Lesions  of  the
digestive  tract  are  as  follows:  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  small  intes-
tines is  red,  and  numerous  eccymosed  spots  are  found,  also  hemorrhages
in  the  subucous  tissue.  Occasionally  the  contents  of  the  intestines  are
found   to  be  bloody.
"In  the  brain  there  are  the  alterations  of  the  cerebral  oedema,  the
nervous  substance  is  soft,  the  convoltions  are  flattened.  There  is  an  exu-
date of  a  serious  character  in  the  lateral  ventricles  and  dilation  of  the
blood  vessels  of  the  brain.  We  also  have  found  evidences  of  fatty  degenera-
tion of  the  heart,  liver,  kidneys  and  an  abnormal  swelling  of  the  lymphatic
gin  nds.
"Treatment. — The  treatment  of  distemper  is  principally  symptomatic.
We  have,  however,  a  remedy  that  is  capable  of  destroying  the  contagious
germ.  Our  researches  have  established  the  fact  that  Clayton's  Distem-
perine  and  Distemperine  Tablets  enables  us  to  combat  the  disease  suc-
cessfully. As  soon  as  symptoms  of  distemper  are  observed,  careful  at-
tention to  all  hygienic  conditions  should  be  given  immediately.  There
should  be  comfortable,  well-ventilated  quarters  furnished  for  the  animal,
and  more  especially  there  should  be  plenty  of  fresh  air,  but  no  draught.
These  quarters  should  be  thoroughly  disinfected  (See  Clayton's  Ceoline
Dog  Wash),  with  changes  of  bedding  daily.  The  administration  of  Clay-
ton's Distemperine  or  Clayton's  Distemperine  Tablets  should  be  commenced
at  once  and  given  according  to  directions.  The  discharge  from  the  nose
and  eyes  should  be  looked  after  and  removed  several  times  daily,  or  as
often  as  it  collects.  The  eyes  should  be  bathed  with  warm  water  often,
as  it  is  a  great  relief.  This  matter  is  too  often  neglected.  If  there  are
occular  complications  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  'No.  2*  Eye  Lotion  should
be  applied  to  prevent  those  serious  lesions  that  so  often  occur  in  this  dis-
ease. If  there  are  skin  manifectations  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  Mange  or
Skin  Cure  should  be  applied  carefully,  and  will  not  disturb  the  animal.-
The  skin  eruption  sometimes  causes  the  animal  much  distress.  In  cases
where  the  disease  is  localized  in  the  organs  of  digestion,  very  careful  at-
tention should  be  given  to  the  ailment.  Careful  nursing  and  feeding  are
of  the  utmost  importance.  The  dog's  strength  must  be  looked  after
and  a  highly  nutritious,  easily  digested  diet  given.  Chopped  raw  beef  is
often  taken  when  all  else  is  refused,  sheep's  head  broth  with  oatmeal  or
rice  is  very  good..  If  the  animal  is  very  weak,  beef  tea,  raw  eggs  and  port
wine  should  be  given  often  but  in  small  quantities.  If  food  is  refused
enough  nourishment  must  be  forced  down  him  to  sustain  life.  Should  the
stomach  refuse  to  retain  the  food  he  may  be  fed  per  enema.  Strong  purga-
tives are  to  be  avoided  in  this  disease.  Exercise  is  injurious,  the  animal
should  be  kept  quiet.
"When  the  animal  is  convalescent  his  system  should  be  built  up,  and
cod  liver  oil  is  valuable  in  these  cases,  while  Clayton's  Condition  Pills
with  pepsin  give  remarkably  good  results."
The  following  valuable  article  on  Distemper  was  published  in  Field
and  Fancy  and  written  by  F.  J.  Skinner,  the  editor.  We  cannot  get  too
much   knowledge   on  this   disease:
"As  soon  as  the  disease  makes  its  appearance  the  affected  animal
should  be  placed  in  specially  prepared  quarters,  which  are  dry  and  well
ventilated,  but  free  from  drafts  and  not  liable  to  great  changes  in  tem-
perature. Unless  the  weather  is  warm  abundant  bedding  of  wheat  straw
should  be  supplied,  and  the  patient  made  as  comfortable  as  possible.  Dis-
infectants should  be  in   constant   use.
"The  bedding  should  be  changed  at  least  once  each  day,  and  oftener,
if  the  patient  is  greatly  prostrated  and  unable  to  move  about.  It  is  also
best  to  slightly  darken  the  quarters  so  that  the  patient  may  not  be  dis-
turbed by  the  light  or  the  flies,  which  are  apt  to  congregate  about  him.
"As  the  disease  progresses  it  is  probable  that  the  dog's  appetite  will
fail,  and  while  at  first  he  may  eat  sparingly  of  finely  chopped  meat,  broth
thickened  with  rice,,  or  toasted  bread  or  slightly  heated  milk,  the  time  may
come  when  he  will  have  to  be  urged  or  compelled   to  partake  of  food.
"When  the  stomach  is  decidedly  weak,  beef  tea,  raw  eggs  and  milk
to  which  lime  water  has  been  added  must  be  depended  upon.  When  hand
feeding  must  be  resorted  to  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  continued
forcing  of  food  upon  the  patient  will  disturb  and  excite  and  overcome  the
good   effects   which   might   result   from   the   administration   of   food.
"Raw  eggs  are  easily  fed,  as  it  is  only  necessary  to  break  off  the
ends  of  the  shell,  open  the  dog's  mouth  with  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,
and  withdrawing  the  tongue  somewhat  with  one  or  two  fingers  of  the  right
hand  allow  the  contents  of  the  egg  to  run  down  his  throat.  If  he  refuses
to  swallow  relaxing  the  tongue  will   usually  have  the  desired   effect.