bia,' it  was  either  not  shown  that  the  subject  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog  at
all,  or  that  the  dog  had  been  mad  in  the  Pasteur  sense.  Indeed,  the
errors  that  have  been  committed  in  this  direction  would  be  amusing  were
it  not  for  other  and  tragical  attendant  features.
"Let  it  be  inoculated  in  the  public  mind  that  the  sensational  symp-
toms which  tradition  assigns  to  rabies  are  fictitious,  and,  like  the  fear  of
water  which  has  given  a  name  to  the  malcondition,  never  occurs  after  the
bite  of  a  dog;  that  it  is  no  more  possible  for  a  dog  to  inoculate  a  man
with  the  tendency  to  bark  and  run  on  all  faurs  than  it  is  for  a  man  to
inoculate  a  dog  with  the  faculty  of  speech  and  an  upright  gait — then  what
has  been  drifting  through  medical  and  newspaper  literature  as  rabies  would
disappear.
"If  once  thoroughly  understood  by  the  people  at  large,  that  supersti-
tious fear  and  expectant  attention  may  not  alone  develop  serious  nervous
symptoms,  but,  also  actually  cause  death,  many  who  assume  themselves
threatened  with  some  rational  ill  effects,  such  as  ptomaine  poisoning  after  a
dog  bite,  would  cultivate  that  healthful  self-control,  which  was  so  happily
inoculated  by  Dr.  James  Gordon  Spencer  in  the  Watertown  case,  and  Dr.
Exton  in  the  Arlington  case."
Herewith  is  reproduced  Hugh  Dalziel's  entire  treatise  on  this  subject.
He  is  a  noted  authority  in  England  and  the  author  of  several  books  on
dogs  and  horses.  You  will  see  that  he  believes  in  hydrophobia,  so  you
have  now  both  sides  of  the  question  to  read,  ponder  over  and  digest  so  as
to  get  a  full  and  complete  idea  of  the  matter  in  all  its  bearings;
"Although  the  symptoms  of  this  terrible  disease  have  long  been  recog-
nized and  clearly  stated  by  scentfic  men,  there  is  still,  unfortunately,  great
ignorance  regarding  it  evinced  by  the  general  public — an  ignorance  fraught
with  much  danger  to  man,  and  the  cause  of  much  cruelty  and  death,  often
most  brutally  inflicted  on  hundreds  of  poor  dogs,  more  innocent  of  mad-
ness than  the  frantic  crowd  who  do  their  best  to  hunt  the  poor  frightened,
nervous  beast  into  that  state.
"I  have  found  the  prevailing  idea  of  a  mad  dog  to  be  that  of  an
animal  with  glaring,  bloodshot  eyes,  covered  with  the  froth  of  his  excite-
ment, and  rushing  wildly  hither  and  thither  in  search  of  man  or  beast
to  bite;  whilst  a  dog  lost  in  a  crowded  town,  and  excitedly  nervous  finding
himself  out  of  his  knowledge,  is  often  enough  to  raise  the  croy  of  'a  mad
dog,'  and  with  many  a  fit  is  a  sign  positive,  and  the  occurrence  of  epilepsy
has  been   the  incitement  to   canine  murder  in  numberless  instances.  .
"It  is  quite  true  that  the  disease  produces  great  nervous  excitement,
and  creates  a  spirit  of  unrest — it  also,  in  the  first  stages  of  its  existence,
increases  the  flow  of  saliva — but  not  the  emission  of  froth  from  the  mouth,
which  is  produced  by  the  champing  of  the  jaws  in  an  epileptic  fit;  in  rabies,
the  discharge  becomes  thick  and  glutinous,  and  the  sufferer  may  be  seen
paw'ng  at  his  mouth  to  clear  it,  as  though  choked  with  a  bone.  The  dispo-
sition of  the  dog  is  often  entirely  changed,  and  one  frolicsome  and  fond  of
being  caressed  may  become  sullen  and  shy,  retiring  into  some  quiet  lair,
generally  selecting  some  dark  corner,  behind  a  large  object.  If  out  on  the
march  he  will  rather  evade  man  than  seek  company;  and  although  biting
furiously  at  all  and  everything  that  obstructs  his  passage,  rarely  going  out
of  his  way  to  seek  an  enemy.  He  evinces  a  strong  desire  to  tear  and  gnaw
everything  he  gets  hold  of;  nothing  comes  amiss  to  him,  and  the  dispo-
sition to  bite  is  shown  by  his  frequently  snapping  at  imaginary  objects
in  the  air.  Contrary  to  the  generally  received  -opinion,  and  condemnatory
of  the  name  hydrophobia,  erroneously  given  to  this  disease  in  the  dog,  the
poor  sufferer  laps  water  greedily  as  long  as  his  power  over  the  muscles  is
retained,  and  #hen  that  is  gone,  plunges  his  head  into  the  water  to  cool
his  parched  and  burning  mouth.  In  the  latter  stages,  the  dog  may  have
convulsions,  but  fits  are  not  a  premonitory,  nor  an  early  symptom,  and  their
presence,  independent  of  more  certain  evidence  of  rabies,  should  never  give
rise  to  fear.
"I  can  not  do  more  than  to  indicate  the  more  prominent  and  well-
known  certain  symptoms,  and  those  who  wish  for  fuller  information  on
the  subject  should  consult  the  works  of  Youatt,  and  the  more  recent  book
of  Dr.  Fleming.
"Whilst  too  great  care  and  caution  cannot  be  used  in  dealing  with  a
disease  so  dangerous,  I  wish  to  warn  my  readers  against  that  unnecessary
and  hysterical  alarm  which  dethrones  the  reason,  and  predisposes  to  the
gravest  results.  If  there  be  reason  to  suspect  a  dog  of  madness,  if  his
natural  disposition  appears  changed  without  a  traceable  cause,  if  he  tears
and  bites  at  his  bedding,  pieces  of  wood,  carpets,  dirt,  etc.,  if  he  be  seen
to  paw  at  his  mouth  frequently,  whilst  no  obstructive  articles  is  in  his
throat,  if  at  intervals  he  snaps  and  bites  savagely  at  objects  real  and
imaginary,  if,  after  these  paroxysms,  he  be  seen  to  stagger  and  fall,  if  he
show  an  insatiable  thirst — if  any  or  all  of  these  symptoms  be  present,  shut
him  up  where  he  can  do  no  harm,  and  call  in  to  your  aid  a  verterinary
surgeon.  By  allowing  Him  to  study  the  case,  you  will  do  a  public  good;
for  fortunately,  cases  of  rabies  are  very  rare,  and  it  is  only'  by  the  careful
investigation    of   them   by   men   specially   educated    to   undertake    the   duty,
that  we  can  ever  hope  to  discover  a  cure.
"Among  the  numerous  superstitions  that  hang  like  clouds  round  ca-
nine madness,  obscuring  any  possibility  of  a  clear  view  of  it,  1  will  refer
to  one  only,  most  of  them  being  altogether  unworthy  of  notice.  It  has
long  been  a  popular  belief  that  a  person  bitten  by  a  dog,  even  if  the. ani-
mal be  in  perfect  health  at  the  time,  is  never  safe  from  an  attack  of
rabies  so  long  as  the  dog  lives;  for  it  is  held,  that  should  the  dog  become
mad  at  any  future  period,  however  distant,  the  person  bitten  will  also  fall
a  victim  to  the  disease.  Cases  supposed  to  prove  that  rabies  may  be  com-
municated by  a  dog  free  from  it  are  constantly  cropping  up,  and  I  know
of  a  case  of  a  woman  who  is  said  to  have  died  from  hydrophobia,  caused
by  the  bite  of  a  dog  that  was  clearly  proved  to  be  free  from  rabies  at  the
time,  and  has  remained  so  ever  since.  The  woman,  it  appears,  was  in  an
upper  room  with  her  child,  and  the  entrance  of  a  small  dog  so  alarmed
her  for  her  child's  safety  that  she  seized  the  intruder  and  threw  it  out  of
the  window,  and  was  bitten  in  the  struggle;  the  woman  was  taken  ill  and
died,  showing  all  the  symptoms  of  hydrophobia,  and  the  surgeon  who  at-
tended her  certified  that  death  was  from  that  disease.  1  do  not  intend  to
dispute  the  opinion  thus  given,  but  I  venture  to  say  had  the  whole  facts
of  the  case  been  carefully  investigated,  say,  by  a  jury  of  physicians  of
experience,  it  would  have  proved  that  the  bite  of  that  dog  had  but  a  small
share  in  causing  the  woman's  death.  To  me  it  appears  as  reasonable
to  believe  that  the  dog  could  have  bitten  the  woman  without  being  in  the
same  room  with  her,  as  that  the  bite  could  communicate  rabies  when  the
disease  did  not  at  that  time  exist.  Such  cases  should  not  be  passed  by,
but  thoroughly  sifted  by  qualiled  men,  that  the  truth  might  be  elicited  and
the  fears  of  the  nervous  allayed.  The  practical  lesson  to  be  learned  from
this  is,  care  and  caution  in  dealing  with  dogs,  especially  strange  ones,  and
to  curb  unnecessary  alarm,  which  often  brings  about  the  evil  it  would
avoid.  When  an  accident  does  occur,  have  the  wound  promptly  cauterized
to  its  full  depth  with  caustic,  and  let  nervous,  in  addition,  obtain  medical
advice.
"I  recommend  those  having  much  to  do  with  dogs  to  carry  in  the
pocket  at  all  times  one  of  those  wooden  cases  of  caustic  which  costs  but
sixpence,  and  with  this  safeguard  about  them,  and  the  presence  of  mind
and  nerve  to  use  it  promptly  and  thoroughly — taking  care  the  caustic
reaches  as  deep  as  the  tooth  did — the  bite  even  of  a  mad  dog  will  do  them
no  harm.
"Since  the  above  was  written,  ten  years  ago,  rabies  in  dogs  has  un-
fortunately been  rather  frequent,  and  a  few  years  ago  from  the  number
of  deaths  from  hydrophobia,  caused  by  the  bites  from  mad  dogs,  quite  a
panic  arose,  with  the  result  that  the  attention  of  medical  men  and  vet-
erarians  at  home  and  abroad  has  been  very  much  directed  to  its  nature;
as  yet,  however,  no  cure  has  been  discovered,  and  I  see  no  reason  to
alter  what  I  have  already  said;  but  it  will  be  useful  very  briefly  to  notice
one  or  two  points  of  special  interest.  Latest  researches  seem  to  point
conclusively  that  the  rabid  poison  exists  in  the  saliva,  and  in  none  of  the
other   secretions.
"Although  its  propagation  by  a  bite  or  by  the  poisoned  saliva  coming
in  contact  with  an  abraised  or  highly  vascular  surface  are  clearly  enough
the  means  of  transmission  and  propagation,  how  it  originates  is  unknown;
exposure  to  great  heat,  feeding  on  salt  meat,  compelled  abstinence  from
water,  and  many  other  causes,  have  been  suggested  as  a  producing  cause,
but  proved  not  to  be  so.  The  old  notion  that  it  is  peculiarly  a  disease  of
the  dog  days,  is  fabulous,  nor  is  it  connected  with  the  functions  of  procrea-
tion, further  than  the  present  law  in  this  country  permits  owners  of  bitches
when  in  season  to  be  fought  over  by  excited  males,  furnishes  excellent  op-
portunities for  its  spread  as  well  as  being  an  insult  to  decency.  It  is  the
duty  of  men  who  keep  dogs  to  have  some  knowledge  of  their  nature,  and
the  law  should  punish  the  ignorance  or  carelessness  that  causes  an  offense
and  a  danger  to  the  public.
"Unfortunately  no  cures  are  yet  known;  such  things  as  the  Birling
and  the  Webb's  cures,  and  other  pretended  family  secrets  may  be  swept
aside.  Medical  men  have  tried  every  conceivable  drug,  and  a  few  years
ago  it  was  thought  that  a  specific  had  been  found  in  curari,  but  it  proved
delusive.  Hot  and  vapor  baths  have  their  votaries,  just  as  half  drowning  in
Crib,  a  pool  in  the  Severn,  was  at  one  time  believed  in.
"Preventive  measures  are  alone  to  be  relied  on,  and  the  very  old  one
of  the  Greeks,  sucking  the  part,  is  excellent,  and  a  small  instrument  has
been  invented  which  can  be  easily  used;  it  is  like  an  old-fashioned  breast
exhauster,  with  the  bell-shaped  head  and  long  tube,  but  with  a  round  bell
half  way  up  the  tube  as  well,  which  of  course  receives  all  that  the  operator
sucks  out  of  the  wound  and  renders  him  quite  free  from  danger.  It  is
made  by  a  chemist  in  York,  and  can  be  bought  through  Maw,  Son  &  Com-
pany,  Aldergate  street,   London."
Here  is  a  sensible  article  on  hydrophobia,  published  in  Man's  Best
Friend,  being  an  interview  with  'John  P.  Haines,  of  New  York  City,  the
President  of  the  American  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Ani-
mals, a  man  who  has  had  considerable  experience:
"Hydrophobia  is  one  of  the  rarest  of  diseases,  and  it  is  the  height  of
folly  to  imagine  that  every  dog  that  happens  to  suffer  intensely  from  the
heat  is  either  mad  or  in  danger  of  going  mad.  A  mad  policeman  is  every
bit  as  dangerous  as  a  mad  dog,  and  probably  in  the  past  quite  as  many  of
the  former  as  of  the  latter  have  been  mad."
"Mr.  Haines  quotes  from  high  authorities  when  he  says  that  in  ninety-
nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred  the  poor  brute  which  is  destroyed  while  sup-
posedly in  the  throes  of  rabies  is  merely  suffering  from  excitement  which
will  cur?  itself,  and  that  a  person  bitten  by  an  animal  under  such  circum-
stances is  absolutely  in  no  danger  of  serious  results  unless  he  permits  him-
self to  become  a  victim  of  his  own  disordered  imagination.  Mr.  Haines  is
himself  authority  for  the  statement  that  the  cases  of  death  from  hydropho-
bia reported  from  time  to  time  are  wrongly  diagnosed,  and  that,  as  a  rule,
they  result  simply  from  worry.  The  weather  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
case,  although  no  doubt  dogs  are  less  liable  to  sickness  in  cold  weather  than
during  the  hot  spell,  a  state  of  affairs  due  perhaps  almost  as  much  to  the
thoughtlessness  or  ignorance  of  their  owners  as  to  the  weather  conditions.
"A  dog  that  has  been  properly  fed  and  is  being  so  fed,  will  suffer
much  less  discomfort  than  another  which  has  been  stuffed  with  food  calcu-
lated to  heat  the  blood,  and  such  a  dog  is,  and  especially  when  not  over-
weight, far  more  liabel  to  escape  illness  than  the  fat,  badly-conditioned
animal  that  is  quite  'above  himself,'  and  ready  to  go  wrong  at  any  time.
"What  are  the  dog  days?  They  are  the  heated  term  in  July  and  Au-
gust, during  which  dogs  are  supposed  to  be  peculiarly  liable  to  rabies,  or
canine  madness.  That  is  one  answer,  but  there  is  a  better.  There  are  no
dog  days,  because  there  is  no  time  of  the  year  when  dogs  are  especially
liable  to  rabies.  There  are  no  more  cases  of  rabies  in  July  and  August
than  in  December  and  January.  Moreover,  rabies  is  one  of  the  rarest  of
canine  diseases.  When  you  hear  a  cry  of  'Mad  Dog!'  the  chances  are
many  thousands  to  one  that  the  dog  is  not  mad.  When  you  read  in  the
papers  of  someone  being  bitten  by  a  mad  dog  the  chances  are  thousands
to  one  it  is  not  true.  A  person  bitten  by  a  mad  dog  is  not  doomed  to
die  a  fearful  death  by  hydrophobia.  Not  at  all,  for  hydrophobia  in  a  hu-
man being  is  much  more  rare  than  rabies  in  a  dog.  Expert  physicians
who  have  given  special  attention  to  the  subject  are  convinced  that  hydro-
phobia is  never  caused  by  the  bite  of  a  dog,  but  is  simply  a  hysterical
nervous  disease  caused  by  an  unfounded  dread.  Don't  take  this  for  grant-
ed;   but   remember   these    facts:
"First,  That  there  are  more  than  a  million  chances  to  one  that  any
dog  which  is  supposed  to  be  mad  is  not  mad  at  all;  second,  that,  in  all
probability,  any  dog  by  which  a  person  may  happen  to  be  bitten  is  not
mad;  and  third,  that  even  if  a  person  is  bitten  by  a  dog  that  is  really
mad,   the  danger  of  hydrophobia  is  very  slight  indeed.
"If  you  will  note  the  following  facts  you  will  probably  find  them  to
be  quite  different  from  the  popular  fancies  by  which  most  persons  are  mis-
led. It  is  supposed  that  a  mad  dog  dreads  water.  It  is  not  so.  The  mad
dog  is  very  likely  to  plunge  his  head  to  the  eyes  in  water,  though  he
cannot  swallow  it,  and  laps  it  with  difficulty.  It  is  supposed  that  a  mad
dog  runs  about  with  evidences  of  intense  excitement.  It  is  not  so.  The.
mad  dog  never  runs  about  in  agitation;  he  never  gallops;  he  is  always
alone,  usually  in  a  strange  .place,  where  he  jogs  along  slowly.  If  he  is
approached  by  a  dog  or  man  he  shows  no  signs  of  excitement,  but  when
the  dog  or  man  is  near  enough  he  snaps  and  resumes  his  solitary  trot.
If  a  dog  barks,  yelps,  whines  or  growls,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  The  only
sound  a  mad  clog  is  ever  known  to  emit  is  a  hoarse  howl,  and  that  but
seldom.  Even  blows  will  not  extort  an  outcry  from  a  mad  dog.  There-'
fore*,  if  any  dog,  under  any  circumstances,  utters  any  other  sound  than
that  of  a  hoarse  howl,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  It  is  supposed  that  the  mad
dog  froths  at  the  mouth.  It  is  not  so.  If  a  dog's  jaws  are  covered  or
flecked  with  white  froth,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  The  surest  of  all  signs  that
a  dog  is  mad  is  a  thick  and  ropy  brown  mucous  clinging  to  his  lips,  which
he  often  tries  vainly  to  tear  away  with  his  paws  or  wash  away  with  wa-
ter. If  your  dog  is  bitten  by  any  other  dog,  watch  him  carefully.  If  he
is  infected  by  rabies  you  will  discover  signs  of  it  possibly  in  from  six  to
ten  days.  Then  he  will  be  restless,  often  getting  up  only  to  lie  down
again,  changing  his  position  impatiently,  turning  from  side  to  side,  and
constantly  licking  or  scratching  some  part  of  his  head,  limbs  or  body.
He  will  be  irritable  and  inclined  to  dash  at  other  animals,  and  he  will
sometimes  snap  at  objects  which  he  imagines  to  be  near  him.  He  will  be
excessively  thirsty,  lapping  water  eagerly  and  often.  Then  there  will  be
glandular  swellings  about  his  jaws  and  throat,  and  he  will  vainly  endeavor
to  rid  himself  of  a  thick,  ropy,  mucous  discharge  from  his  mouth  and
throat.  If  he  can,  he  will  probably  stray  away  from  home  and  trot  slowly
and  mournfully  along  the  highway  or  across  the  country,  meddling  with
neither  man  nor  beast,  unless  they  approach  him,  and  then  giving  a  single
snap.  The  only  exception  to  this  behavior  occurs  in  ferocious  dogs,  which,
during  the  earlier  stage  of  excitement,  may  attack  any  living  object  in
sight.  These  symptoms  of  rabies  are  condensed  from  valuable  information
received    from   physicians   of   undoubted   authority."
The  following  interesting  article  was  written  by  Mrs.  Sarah  K.  Bol-
ton, the  eminent  authoress,  who  has  written  many  books  on  animals,  and
who  is  a  great  friend  of  dogs,  is  clearly  entitled  to  space  in  this  book.
Mrs.  Bolton's  last  book,  "Our  Devoted  Friend,  the  Dog,"  should  be  read
by  every  dog  lover.  It  is  published  by  L.  C.  Page  &  Co.,  Boston,  Mass.-
Send  and  get  it.
"Almost  weekly  or  monthly  in  summer  we  have  a  'mad  dog'  scare.
Some  dog  has  been  frothing  at  the  mouth,  which  is  never  a  sign  of  rabies,
but  of  sickness  or  a  fit;  is  chased  by  a  crowd  and  after  crawling  under
some  porch  or  shed  for  protection,  is  killed  by  the  random  and  numerous
shots   of  some   policemen.
"We  ought  to  learn  from  the  experience  of  others  that  there  is  very
little  danger  from  the  bite  of  a  dog.  Let  any  person  ask  a  dozen  men
if  they  have  ever  been  bitten  by  a  dog  and  probably  more  than  half  will
say  yes,  in  boyhood  or  later  in  life,  with  no  evil  results  whatever.
"Dr.  Gordon  Stables,  a  prominent  Englishman,  says:  'All  my  life  I
have  been  among  dogs.  I  have  written  five  books  on  them.  I  have  han-
dled as  many  as  30,000  dogs  a  year.  I  have  been  bitten  very  often,  and
care  no  more  for  a  bite  than  I  do  for  the  scratch  of  a  pin;  yet  I  have
never  seen  a  case  of  rabies,  and  I  do  not  believe  such  exists.'
"Surgeon  General  Thornton  says:  'I  have  served  in  India  for  thirty-
five  years,  and  was  for  many  years  in  medical  charge  of  a  large  Indian
district,  with  a  population  of  2,000,000.  Six  dispensaries  where  about
100,000  people  were  treated  annually  were  under  my  superintendence,
yet,  although  dog  bites  were  frequent,  I  never  met  a  single  case  of  hydro-
phobia in  a  native  Indian,  and  I  believe  that  the  experience  of  others  who
have  been  civil  surgeons  in  India  is  similar  to  mine.'
19G  iTYDROPITOmA.
"Dr.  Stockweii,  a  celebrated  authority  on  dog  disease,  says:  'Distem-
per, toothache,  earache,  epilepsy  and  the  whole  class  of  nervous  diseases  to
which  dogs  are  subject  are  constantly  taken  for  rabies.  Personally,  after
moio  than  thirty  years'  experience  as-  a  dog  owner  and  student  of  canine
and  comparative  medicine,  I  have  yet  to  meet  with  a  genuine  case  of  rabies
in  the  dog,  and  of  some  scores  of  so-called  rabid  dogs  submitted  to  me
for  inspection  I  have  found  one  and  all  to  be  suffering  from  other  and
comparatively    innocent   diseases.'
"Dr.  Charles  W  .Dulles,  the  eminent  lecturer  on  the  History  of  Medi-
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  says:  'After  16  years  of  investigation'
'he  has  failed  to  find  a  single  case  of  hydrophobia  'that  can  be  conclusively
proved  to  have  resulted  from  the  bite  of  a  dog  or  any  other  cause.'
Dr.  Dulles  says  in  regard  to  thej.reatment  of  a  dog  bite:  "I  am  strong-
ly opposed  to  the  practice  of  cauterizing  with  silver  nitrate.  I  have  seen
and  treated  very  many  dog  bites,  and  have  not  used  lunar  caustic  for  13
years,  and  no  person  that  I  have  treated  has  yet  developed  hydrophobia,
or  that  the  mortality  of  those  treated  by  me  is  less  than  that  of  those
treated  in  Pasteur  institutes.  My  treatment  is  simply  through  surgical
cleaning  and  the  application  of  a  simple  antiseptic  dressing  for  a  few
days,  with  the  positive  assurance  that  there  will  be  no  danger  of  any  dis-
ease."
Dr.  Irving  C.  Rosse  says  in  a  paper  read  before  the  American  Neuro-
logical Association,  Philadelphia,  June  3,  1895:  "In  Asia  Minor  and  in
Constantinople,  the  home  of  pariah  dogs,  one  never  hears  of  hydrophobia.
The  secretary  of  the  Japanese  legation  in  Washington  tells  me  that  he  has
never  known  of  the  disease  in  Japan,  and  that  in  Korea,  with  more  dogs
than  any  other  country,  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia  is  unheard  of.  In
London,  with  its  five  and  one-half  million  inhabitants?  but  one  case  was
reported  in   1892."
Dr.  Dulles  finds  from  statistics  gathered  in  the  United  States,  that
there  is  only  one  hydrophobia  case  to  four  million  inhabitants.  Of  267  per-
sons in  the  U.  S.  bitten  by  dogs  supposed  to  be  rabid,  he  says  only  eight
persons  have  died.  •
Many  of  the  best  physicians  recommended  hot  water  baths  for  dog
bites,  as  is  done  in  India,  rather  than  the  Pasteur  system,  with  its  great
expense  and  doubtful  results.  Professor  Peter,  the  able  editor  of  the  French