with   syrup   of  mucilage  to   prevent  its  irritating  the  throat.
"Vomiting  should,  if  possible,  be  prevented  by  carefully  selecting
those  foods  that  ihe  stomach  seems  best  able  to  digest,  but  if  it  is  so
irritable  as  to  expel  the  most  easily  digested  foods,  give  from  two  to  four
drops  of  Scheele's  strength  of  hydrocyanic  acid,  combined  with  from  two
to  eight  grains  of  pepsin,  which  will  relieve  the  irritability  of  the  digestive
organs   and   stop    the   vomiting.
"Diarrhea  must  not  be  too  hurriedly  checked,  unless  the  discharges  are
so  frequent  as  to  debilitate  the  animal.  In  mild  cases  give  paregoric  in  from
one-half  to  two  teaspoonful  doses,  and  if  that  is  not  effectual  a  mixture
of  from  five  to  ten  grains  of  chalk  and  from  five  to  fifteen  drops  of  ether
and  laudanum  may  be  given  in  a  little  milk  or  soup.
"In  arriving  at  the  proper  close  of  the  various  drugs  I  have  recom-
mended, the  minimum  dose  is  suitable  for  clogs  weighing,  when  developed,
from  fifteen  to  thirty  pounds,  and  the  maximum  is  for  clogs  that  will  weigh
in  the  vicinity  of  one  hundred  pounds.  Larger  or  smaller  animals  should
have  the  dose  correspondingly  increased  or  decreased,  as  the  case  may  be.
Puppies  six  months  of  age  will  stand  half  the  dose  given  a  grown  animal
of  the  same  breed,  and  for  puppies  under  six  months  a  corresponding  di-
minution of  the  dose  must  be  made.
"In  conclusion  I  again  desire  to  caution  the  owner  against  exposing
puppies  to  cold  during  the  course  of  the  disease,  or  when  the  patient  begins
to  convalesce.  Frequently  in  cases  of  distemper  a  very  decided  improve-
ment in  the  condition  of  the  patient  will  be  observed,  and  the  owner  cor-
respondingly elated  and  encouraged  by  a  spring-like,  sunny  day,  particu-
larly if  the  weather  has  been  previously  damp  and  stormy,  he  will  admit
the  puppy  to  the  kennel  yard  for  breath  of  fresh  air.  The  puppy  in  most
cases,  after  blinking  at  the  sun  and  stretching,  will  select  the  dampest  spot
that  the  sun  strikes  in  the  kennel  yard  and  curl  itself  up.  A  few  moment's
exposure  under  these  conditions  is  sufficient,  and  the  next  morning  the  old
symptoms,  with  incerased  severity,  are  present,  or  the  little  fellow's  la-
bored breathing  indicates  too  plainly  the  fatal  inflammation  and  conges-
tion of  the  lungs."
The  following  is  valuable  on  this  disease:  A.  J.  Sewell,  M.  D.  C.  V.  S.,
who  has  lately  been  appointed  veterinarian  surgeon  to  the  King  of  Eng-
land, gives  the  following  advice  regarding  the  spreading  of  distemper:
"As  distemper  just  now  seems  particularly  prevalent,  and  the  largo
shows  recently  held  are  sure  to  increase  the  number  of  cases,  this  article
will  assist  readers  in  recognizing  the  disease  at  the  commencement,  so  that
the  infected  animal  may  be  isolated  early,  and  thus  prevent,  if  possible,  the
spread  of  the  disease  to  other  dogs,  especially  young  puppies,  which  have
always  a  very  poor  chance  of  recovering.
"I  know  some  few  people,  if  they  get  a  case  of  distemper  in  their
kennels,  take  no  means  of  preventing  it  spreading;  on  the  contrary,  I  have
heard  them  say  that  they  let  all  those  puppies  which  have  not  had  the
disease  come  purposely  in  contact  with  the  sick, one,  so  as  to  let  all  those
have  it  that  will,  and  get  over  it  for  the  time  being.  I  must  confess  this
is  not  my  practice  with  my  own  dogs;  on  the  contrary,  I  take  every  possible
precaution  T  can  to  prevent  them  having  it,  and  I  know  most  breeders  are
as  ^anxious   as   myself avoid   it.
"As  shows  are  no  doubt   the  greatest  source  of  spreading   distemper,
I  advise  that  all  clogs  coming  from  these  places  which  have  not  had  the
disease  should  not  be  returned  home  if  there  is  any  young  stock  in  the
kennels  that  one  does  not  wish  to  be  infected,  and  the  farther  they  are
kept  away  the  better.  Not  only  is  this  necessary,  but  a  separate  attendant
is  required.  If  you  have  the  same  man,  you  may  as  well  have  the  same
kennel.  If  these  suggestions  are  adopted  there  will  not  be  the  least  danger
of  the  disease  spreading,  and  I  feel  pretty  sure,  if  people  would  properly
isolate  all  distemper  cases  the  disease  might  be  almost,  if  not  entirely,
eradicated    from    the   country.
"The  first  symptom  of  distemper  is  a  rise  of  temperature — if  a  dog
is  dull  and  off  his  food,  take  his~"temperature.  It  is  best  to  take  it  in  the
rectum,  where  the  normal  is  about  one  hundred  and  one  to  one  hundred
and  one  and  one-half  degrees  Fahrenheit;  if  taken  under  the  arm  or  inside
the  thigh  it  is  one  degree  lower.  If  the  thermometer-  registers  two  or
three  degrees  of  temperature  above  normal  you  may  be  sure  there  is  some-
thing wrong,  and  the  dog  should  be  isolated  at  once;  and  by  doing  this  the
infection  may  often  be  prevented  spreading.  If  the  disease  is  distemper
other  symptoms  will  soon  develop,  as  a  husky  cough,  loss  of  appetite  and
condition,  and  occasionally  vomiting.  The  eyes  are  weak  and  sensitive  to
light,  and  there  is  often  a  little  gummy  discharge  which  collects  along  the
edges  of  the  lids;  the  breath  is  offensive,  and  the  teeth  become  furred.
Diarrhea  may,  or  may  not,  occur.  If  the  illness  is  only  some  passing  ail-
ment the  temperature  will  soon  be  normal,  and  the  dog  assume  his  usual
condition.  But  the  temperature,  even  in  distemper,  after  two  or  three
days,  may  go  down  to  normal;  but  do  not  be  deceived  by  this,  and  think
the  dog  is  all  right,  but  look  out  for  some  of  the  other  symptoms  men-
tioned, and  if  the  dog  is  in  for  that  disease  they  are  sure  to  appear,  and
the  fever  will  return  again  in  a  couple  of  days  or  so.
"People  often  think  a  dog  cannot  have  distemper  without  there  is  a
discharge  from  the  nose;  this  is  a  mistake,  but  it  certainly  does  occur
in  most  cases,  though  it  does  not  appear  as  a  rule  until  the  dog  has  been
ill  for  some  time.  If  the  lungs  become  affected  the  breathing  is  short
and  quick,  not  panting  with  the  mouth  open,  the  chest  is  tender  on  pres-
sure. At  first  there  is  no  cough,  but  after  two  or  three  days  there  is  a
suppressed  painful  cough,  with  retching.  The  pulse  is  often  much  acceler-
ated, the  beats  varying  from  one  hundred  and  ten  to  one  hundred  and
forty  per  minute.  In  some  cases  the  pulse  is  very  slow,  and  may  only
be  forty-eight  to  the  minute;  of  course,  this  refers  to  a  big  dog.  A  pulse
of  this  kind  is  worse  than  a  fast  one  with  pneumonia.  When  it  is  between
sixty  and  seventy  in  a  small  dog  it  is  also  serious  with  lung  complications.
The  heart's  action  in  dogs  is  very  frequently  intermittent  even  in  health.
The  eyes  during  distemper  are  often  a  source  of  anxiety,  and  in  those  dogs
with  prominent  orbits,  as  spaniels,  pugs,  etc.,  there  is  always  a'n  inclination
for  ulcers  to  form,  which  are  extremely  painful."
The  following  was  written  by  "Westerner"  and  published  in  Field
and  Fancy.  We  cannot  know  too  much  on  this  most  dreaded  disease  so  I
give   the   article   entire:
Distemper  in  Dogs.
"Each  year  brings  around  its  popular  dog  shows,  and  in  these  days
when  nothing  is  thought  of  high  prices  being  paid  for  good  specimens  in
most  all  the  breeds,  many  of  which  after  winning  fame  in  public  competition
succumb  to  distemper,  the  American  pulic  is  in  need  of  some  sound  advice,
which  will,  if  faithfully  followed,  save  the  lives  of  innumerable  dogs.  It
is  said  (hat  whoever  discovers  a  sure  specific  cure  for  distemper  in  dogs
will  have  made  his  fortune,  for  probably  60  per  cent  of  all  the  thorough-
bred dogs  bred  annually  die  of  this  dread  disease,  at  periods  generally
following  the  large  shows  in  Eastern  cities.  The  following  practical  sug-
gestions and  observations  based  upon  the  experience  of  many  years  .of
breeding  and  raising,  are  likely  not  new  to  some  owners,  but  will  be  found
most  helpful  by  the  yearly  increasing  number  of  novices,  and  result  in  an
absolute  knowledge  of  how  to  avoid  fatal  results.
"We  know  that  distemper  commonly  develops  during  the  first  year
of  life,  either  at  periods  known  to  be  associated  with  teeth  formation  or
approaching  physical  maturity.
"Primarily,  distemper,  at  its  inception,  shows  a  disturbed  and  inflam-
ed condition  of  the  membraneous  tissue  of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  is
likely  a  condition  corresponding  to  typhoid,  as  some  maintain.  Its  germ
certainly  finds  ready  cultivation  in  the  unhealthy  conditions  which  result
from  worms.  Its  first  usual  symptom  is  a  hard  bronchial  cough,  with
some  retching,  irritated  by  excitement  or  nervousness,  all  no  doubt  caused
by  the  stomach's  disturbed  membraneous  condition.  Whether  at  two  or
three  months,  or  at  six  or  ten  months,  or  any  age,  the  first  thing  to  do  when
this  cough  appears  is  to  chain  the  dog  up  in  some  inside  quarters  where  air
is  good  and  floor  dry.  Here  is  where  the  first  mistake  generally  takes  place.
The  fond  owner,  thinking  because  the  dog  is  lively,  that  his  cough  is  noth-
ing more  than  some  slight  throat  irritation  or  cold,  allows  the  dog  to  sleep
out  in  all  kinds  of  weather,  which  conditions  soon  develop  acute  bronchial
troubles,  generally  pneumonia,  and  in  most  every  case  pneumonia  is  fatal
in  dog-life.
"Distemper  develops  much  slower  than  generally  thought  for.  A  dog
is  first  noticed  to  be  'off  his  food;'  soon  the  cough  is  noticed  in  the  morning
and  toward  night,  and  in  a  week  or  ten  days  it  is  more  than  likely  that
the  eyes  show  a  sticky  discharge  and  the  nose  sooner  or  later  begins  per-
haps to  discharge  likewise  thick  purulent  yellow  mucus.  Many  a  strong
healthy  dog  will  not  show  the  effects  of  the  early  stages  of  the  disease,
but  later  break  down  all  at  once,  as  it  gradually  increases  to  some  climax
with  him.  If  the  mucous  discharge  stage  is  reached,  the  owner  can  count
on  a  month  or  more  of  close  confinement.
PURE  food  is  the  dog's  greatest  need.  The
foremost  veterinarians  agree  that  nearly
all  ordinary  dog  troubles  are  traceable  to  impro-
per feeding.  Foods  manufactured  from  waste
products  and  scraps  are  not  proper  foods.
"Of  great  importance  is  the  isolation  of  the  patient,  chained  up  free
from  activity  and  excitement  from  other  dogs.  If  your  puppy  is  young,
and  you  have  an  old  bitch  (that  has  had  the  distemper),  no  harm  can
follow  shutting  her  in  with  the  patient.  She  will  aid  the  puppy  in  keeping
clean  and  be  very  helpful  in  quieting  him.  Your  chances  are  that  if  this
first  move  is  made  promptly,  and  faithfully  adhered  to,  your  dog  will  have
but  a  'mild  case,'  and  thus  be  saved  all  of  the  deleterious  effects  of  the
ravages  of  the  disease  in  its  worst  forms,  and  in  a  couple  of  weeks  be  over
it.  The  dog  that  is  kept  chained  up  from  the  very  first  symptoms,  stores
up  his  vital  energy  and  strength,  and  has  the  benefit  of  it  when  any  climax
of  the  disease  develops.
"In  treatment,  the  writer  does  not  believe  in  the  speedy  use  of  any
medicine;  the  less  used  the  better  you  are  off,  and  the  clog,  generally.
If  at  first  your  dog  is  suddenly  prostrated,  as  is  common,  one  good,  large
dose  of  rochelle  salts  or  castor  oil  is  a  good  beginning.  If  indications  of
worms  are  present  treat  for  their  removal.  If  the  patient  refuses  food  for
a  couple  of  days,  it  will  do  no  harm  to  let  him  go  without,  but  rather
good.  The  first  stage  is  no  time  to  force  food,  but  on  the  contrary,  does
injury.  Should  much  mucous  discharge  develop  at  the  eyes  and  nose,  and
a  general  fevered  condition  exist,  with  quick  breathing  and  much  loss
of  energy,  quinine  in  moderate  doses,  or  any  tried  'grippe'  tablet  that
has  been  found  good  in  family  use  will  prove  beneficial.  In  giving  any  such
medicines  use  caution  as  to  overdosing,  considering  well  the  age  and  size
of  the  patient,  and  not  oftener  than  once  in  three  or  four  hours,  bearing  in
mind  its  irritating  effect  on  the  stomach  tissues.  The  condition  of  the  stom-
ach is  the  most  important  factor  to  keep  in  mind,  for  on  getting  the  dog
back  to  a  good  appetite  depends  his  recovery.  He  must  have  the  ability
to  digest  and  assimilate  his  food,  as  well  as  to  eat  it,  in  order  that  its
strength-giving  properties  can  help  overcome  the  deleterious  effects  of  the
disease,  as  the  effect  of  this  foreign  germ  life  in  the  system  advances  in
its  attack  on  the  system.
"Right  here,  begin  at  once,  something  that  will,  if  followed  up  regu-
larly, allay  the  development  of  the  worst  tendencies  of  the  disease.  After
the  general  cleansing,  begin  to  give,  three  or  four  times  a  day  for  several
days  and  continually  as  long  as  its  helpfulness  is  indicated  a  tablet  that
can  be  purchased  from  any  druggist,  being  a  compound  of  pepsin  (one  or
two  grains,  according  to  age),  bismuth  and  charcoal.  These  tablets  are
inexpensive  and  should  be  given  after  each  meal,  if  the  patient  takes
food,  and,  if  not,  four  times  a  day.  They  are  easily  taken  or  given,  and
their  beneficial  effect  will  soon  be  observed.  They  will  soothe  the  inflamed
membraneous  tissues  and  aid  the  proper  digestion  of  food  and  its  assimi-
lation.
"In  distemper,  the  feces  are  usually  of  a  greenish,  rank,-  pungent  char-
acter, indicating  a  decidedly  unhealthy  condition  of  the  bowels,  in  the  cause
of  which  both  stomach  indigestion  and  intestinal  indigestion  and  lack  of
assimilation  undoubtedly  share.  This  condition,  if  allowed  to  remain  with-
out attention  results  in  what  is  known  as  the  ulcerous  and  intestinal  form
of  the  disease  which  commonly  develops  when  owners  are  too  anxious  to
keep  their  clogs  eating  rich  food,  when  the  dog's  system  cannot  properly
handle  it.  There  is  no  necessity  for  this  form  of  the  disease  ever  develop-
ing.    It  is  its  worst  form  when  advanced,  and  results  in  most  cases  fatally.
"These  simple  and  harmless  tablets  will  first  digest  the  food  and  en-
able the  dos  to  assimilate  it.  They  soothe  and  tone  up  the  inflamed  intes-
tinal conditions  and  gradually  make  a  dog's- appetite  good  again  and  slowly
but  surelv  brins  about  the  conditions  which  permit  healthy,  well  formed
feces.  When  this  is  accomplished  more  than  half  the  battle  is  fought,  for
so  long  as  the  dog  is  running  off  in  a  diarrheal  condition  the  distemper
germ  seems  to  thrive,  producing  all  sorts  of  gastrical  and  intestinal  trou-
bles, which  are  difficult  to  cure.  Many  make  the  mistake  of  treating  with
stringents  for  diarrhea,  which  naturally  only  cause  more  harm,  as  the  cause
is  not  first  removed.  There  need  be  no  fear  whatever  in  the  moderate
use  of  these  tablets,  for  they  can  produce  no  harmful  effects  whatever,  and
even  should  they  be  given  without  sufficient  cause  therefor  existing,  they
would  be  but  a  tonic  and  help  to  any  normal  conditions.  All  dogs  (espe-
cially puppies)  are  prone  to  overeat,  bolt  their  food  and  tax  too  greatly
their  digestive  organs.  Dogs  in  their  tramp  and  native  state  have  no  such
troubles.  While  our  modern  blooded  breeding  has  given  us  unbroken
lineage  in  fine  pedigrees,  the  dog  constitution,  due  perhaps  to  the  con-
fined kennel  life  most  have  to  put  up  with,  is  not  as  vigorous  at  it  would
otherwise  be.  Many  a  stud  dog  and  brood  bitch  hardly  ever  get  out  of  a
kennel  yard!  need  it  be  wondered  at,  then,  that  the  blue-blooded  puppies
inherit  digestive  organs  that  need  some  help  now  and  then,  and  are  sus-
ceptible subjects  of  contagion  which  develops  at  most  shows?  Fresh  air
and  nice  quarters  tend  to  produce  a  healthy  environment  in  a  kennel,  but
as  the  young  puppie  adds  bone  and  tissue  much  faster  than  is  generally
considered,  the  organs  that  are  responsible  for  this  growth,  great  in  pro-
portion to  size  as  it  is,  and  speedy  development,  need  as  much  general
support  as  it  is  possible  to  give  them.
"If  your  patient  is  well  advanced  in  the  purulent  mucus  discharge  or
acute  bronchial  stage,  before  you  get  at  him,  which  is  usual  in  the  exper-
ience of  amateurs,  begin  at  once  and  conform  rigidly  to  treat  as  here-
tofore suggested,  adding  the  possible  help  of  some  distemper  medicine.
While  these  undoubtedly  when  properly  used  are  very  helpful,  they  are  at
best  but  stimulating  tonics  and  fever  medicines,  and  it  is  well  to  have  on
hand  whichever  one  you  find  gives  good  results.  Should  the  patient  show
general  debility  and  indications  of  the  disease  rather  generally  poisoning
the  system — in  fact,  if  the  nasal  form  develops,  lose  no  time  in  arranging
to  put  in  a  seton.  Any  veterinary  can  do  it,  but  you  can  do  it  yourself
fully  as  well,  as  follows:  Clip  the  hair  on  neck  back  of  skull  close  to  skin
for  three  or  four  inches  square.  Secure  a  piece  of  ordinary  (tarred)  tar-
paulin or  common  hemp  cord,  which  should  be  soaked  in  a  solution  of
carbolic  acid  and  water.  Cut  cord  at  length  of  eight  or  ten  inches.  Catch
one  end  of  it  in  the  joint  of  a  pair  of  small  curved  sharp-pointed  nail
scissors  or  sail-cloth  needle;  hold  skin  just  below  occiput  of  skull  bone,
well  up  away  from  inner  tissues  and  puncture  point  through  from  one
side  of  neck  to  the  other,  drawing  cord  through  so  that  holes  will  be  about
two  inches  apart;  tie  good  large  knots  in  each  end  of  cord,  dressing  at
nrst  with  antiseptic  vaseline,  and  leave  it  in  for  from  five  to  ten  days,
dependent  upon  profuseness  of  discharge.  Draw  cord  from  knot  to  knot
each  day  often,  in  order  to  keep  outlet  free.  The  insertion  of  this  seton  is
not  particularly  painful,  as  it  passes  through  the  outer  skin  covering  only,
and  can  do  no  harm  whatever.  It  should  be  kept  as  clean  as  possible.  It
acts  as  a  counter  irritant  and  drains  off  from  the  system  a  large  amount
of  poisonous  accumulations  and  will  very  soon  relieve  the  head  of  the  acute
troubles  there  concentrated.
In  almost  all  cases  where  the  seton  is  used  soon  enough  its  aid  is
largely  responsible  for  safe  recovery.  The  writer  has  seen  most  wonderful
cures  by  its  assistance  in  the  last  stages  of  the  disease.  It  use  is  of  Eng-
lish origin,  and  one  theory  advanced  to  explain  its  benefit  in  dogs  is  that
as  a  dog  perspires  only  through  the  glands  of  nose  and  mouth,  and  never
through  the  outer  skin  and  coat,  this  outlet  affords  an  immediate  drain
much  needed  to  carry  off  the  poisonous  accumulations  about  the  inner  body
tissues.  When  the  system  is  generally  much  poisoned  with  effects  of  dis-
temper, this  drain  is  very  beneficial  and  never  harmful.  Leave  it  in  until
the  discharge  begins  to  subside,  then  cut  one  end  of  the  cord  and  take
it  out.  Keep  sore  clean  until  healed,  which  will  be  accomplished  within
a  few  days,  and  in  a  month  a  new  growth  of  coat  will  have  covered  up
the  effect  of  this  treatment,  so  that  no  scars  are  left  as  a  blemish  on  the
patient's  neck.
Many  dog  owners  have  special  food  theories  for  distemper,  a  popular
delusion  being  that  meat  fed  to  young  dogs  produces  distemper.  All  young
dogs  should  have  meat  in  moderation,  and  don't  forget  that  dogs  need  salt
in  their  food,  as  well  as  the  human  race  and  animals.  The  frequent  con-
tinual diet  absolutely  without  salt  is  sufficient  to  cause  most  any  kind  of
ailment.  The  writer's  observation  has  been  that  a  dog  in  distemper  gets
along  best  when  given  limited  quantities  of  what  it  craves,  three  to  five
times  daily,  always  bearing  in  mind  the  aim  to  make  the  stomach's  work
easy.  Raw  (fresh)  beef  cut  fine  on  bread,  fed  three  or  four  times  daily,
is  most  excellent.  If  milk  is  relied  upon,  sterilize  it  (rather  than  boil)
and  give  in  moderate  quantities.  Raw  eggs  with  milk  is  generally  very
good  and  strengthening.  Avoid  alcoholic  stimulants,  except  when  dog  is
badly  off,  then  give  whiskey  and  quinine  as  tonic,  and  maybe  a  little  port
wine  with  milk.  The  following  few  important  and  brief  "dont's"  will  aid
some  as  occasional  reminders  and  cautions,  viz.:
Don't  pour  food  down  a  sick  dog  when  he  hasn't  the  ability  to  either
hold  or  digest  it.     It  only  makes  him  worse.
Don't  exercise  a  dog  sick  with  distemper.
Don't  let  a  day  pass  without  proper  use  of  compound  tablets  (pepsin,
bismuth  and  charcoal).
Don't  get  scared  if  your  dog  won't  eat.  It's  better  for  him  not  to  eat
until  he  can  handle  his  food  rightly.     He  won't  die  of  starvation.
Don't  allow  him  to  get  his  feet  wet.  This  is  likely  to  bring  on  pneu-
monia, which  is  generally  fatal.
Don't  wash  a  dog,  no  matter  how  foul  he  may  be,  when  down  with
distemper  or  convalescent.  Brush,  comb  and  clean  with  powder  (flour).
Many  a  dog  has  contracted  incurable  chorea  and  its  twitches  from  a  bath
too  soon  after  distemper.  Keep  him  away  from  the  water  for  three  months
at  least.
Don't  let  your  dog  off  chain  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  feel  better.  Keep
him  there  till  well,  leading  him  for  exercise  only  when  convalescent.  Re-
lapses are  common  and  often  fatal.
When  your  patient  is  once  well  over  distemper  you  can  risk  him  any-
where, for  dogs  do  not  have  the  real  thing  but  once.  If  your  dog's  sys-
tem is  left  very  much  run  down,  blood  tonics  are  good,  according  to  indi-
vidual  needs,    Scott's    Emulsion    being   especially    beneficial.
The  most  important  safeguards  to  bear  in  mind  are:  (1)  Absolute  quiet