by  powerful  antidotes  or  removed  by  the  use  of  emetics,  while  a  bone  finds
its  way  into  the  intestines  and  does  its  deadly  work  without  hindrance.
Confections,  cake  and  dainties  of  all  sorts  should  also  be  tabooed  from
the  bill  of  fare;  they  are  not  the  natural  food  of  a  dog,  and  beside  their
weakening  effect  create  a  false  and  dainty  appetite  which  interferes  with
the  regular  meals,  causing  a  smaller  quantity  to  be  consumed  owing  to
desire  to  get  something  nice  or  an  artificial  repugnance  to  substantial  food'
if  there  is  a  possibility  that  "sugar"  will  be  forthcoming.
The  followng  article,  (with  some  additions),  is  the  one  in  my  last  book,
and  it  cannot  well  be  improved  on,  but  have  added  some  strong  words
against  Hydrophobia,  the  side- 1  fight  on,  as,  since  this  was  written,  fifteen
years  ago,  my  non-believe  in  hydrophobia  has  been  made  stronger,  as  during
this  period  I  have  been  bitten  several  times,  and  quite  badly  chewed  up  by
dogs  that — by  all  the  symptoms  that  are  supposed  to  exist,  and  yet  I  am
here,   writing  another  book,   and   none  the  worse   for   the   bites.
'  "Germs"  are  now  very  fashionable  with  doctors,  (before  we  had
so  many  "germs"  there  were  not  nearly  so  many  sick  and  dying  people  as
there  are  now),  but  now  most  all  verterinarians,  and  some  doctors,  get  out
of  hydrophobia  the  easiest  way  they  can,  by  calling  it  a  "germ."  I  would
like  to  see  one  of  these  "germs."
Appendicitis,  now  so  fashionable  also,  in  humans,  and  an  operation
almost  invariably  necessary,  (the  patient  often  dying,  but  "operation  very
successful"),  and  it's  a  wonder  the  poor  dog  has  as  yet  not  gotten  this  trou-
ble.
To  speak  out  plain  and  honest,  I  do  not  believe  in  hydrophobia  at  all,
for  I  don't  believe  what  I  don't  see,  and  a  good  deal  that  I  do  see.  Many
others,  and  among  them  noted  authorities,  however,  do  believe  in  the  exis-
tence of  such  a  disease,  and  in  writing  on  this  subject  I  shall  give  you  my
own  ideas  and  belief,  and  also  those  of  others  more  noted  than  myself —
so  you  can  read  it  all  and  believe  as  you  like.
I  have  spent  a  lot  of  time  since  my  first  book  in  collecting  additional
information  and  statistics  on  this  subject,  as  it  is  an  important  one  to  know
all  about  that  you  can,  and  I  consider  that  in  this  article  all  has  been
said  that  can  be  said.  The  authorities  I  quote,  pro.  and  con.,  are  eminent,
and  the  case  is  now  presented  to  you,  the  jury,  to  decide:
It  might  be  considered  presumptious  and  egotistical  in  me  to  say  that
there  is  no  such  disease,  but  I  can  honestly  say  that  I  have  never  seen  a
case,  and  don't  believe  in  it,  and  I  have  as  good  a  right  today  to  have  "gone
mad"  as  any  one  who  was  ever  bitten  by  a  dog,  for  I  carry  scars  on  my
body  that  have  been  there  for  many  years — from  bites  of  dogs — and  I
have  been  bitten  hundreds  of  times  in  the  past  thirty  years.  While  I  am
writing  this  article  I  have  five  sores  on  my  right  wrist  received  yesterday
from  a  boarder,  a  mastiff,  but  I  fully  expect  to  be  able  to  finish  this  book
and  live  for  many  years  yet,  long  enough  at  least  to  see  it  in  the  hands  of
every  dog  owner  in  this  country;  in  fact,  I  never  had  time  to  "go  mad."
In  handling  dogs  of  all  breeds,  strange  dogs,  curs  and  thoroughbreds,
incidental  to  having  been  a  "dog  crank"  for  thirty-five  years,  it  necessarily
follows  that  I  have  had  a  vast  and  varied  experience,  and  .could  not  have
done  all  this  and  not  get  bitten.  The  bite  from  a  dog  does  not  trouble
me  any  more  than  if  I  cut  my  finger,  which  might  be  inconvenient  and
bothersome  for  a  few  days.  The  only  thing  I  have  ever  done  when  bitten,
if  the  bite  was  on  a  part  of  the  body  where  I  could  get  my  lips  to  it,
was  to  at  once  suck  the  blood  from  the  place  bitten  and  spit  it  out.  This
ends  the  matter  there  and  then  with  me.  There  might  have  been  danger
of  blood  poisoning,  as  there  always  is  from  a  wound,  but  if  so,  how  simple
to  suck  out  this  poison  and  at  once  get  rid  of  all  danger  by  spitting  out
the  poison  you  have  abstracted  from  the  wound.  It  must  be  done  imme-
diately, however.     Is  there  anything  more  simple  than  this?
In  case  you  are  bitten  on  any  portion  of  the  body  that  you  could  not
get  at  to  suck  the  wound,  or  some  one  was  not  near  to  do  this  for  you,
then  apply  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen  to  the  bite.  Allow  it  to  remain  on  for
a  minute  or  so,  then  remove  the  foamy  matter  produced  thereby  by  squeez-
ing onto  it  some  water  from  a  sponge  or  cloth.  Then  keep  the  wound
clean  by  applying  the  Peroxyde  three  or  four  times  a  day  and  using  often
the   antiseptic   solution   given   under   heading   of   "Bites."
(Since  writing  this  article,  tincture  of  iron  is  the  latest  treatment,
now  used  by  doctors  for  bites,  instead  of  cauterizing  the  wounds,  and  then,
the  "Unguentine  Salve"  for  healing).
Now,  should  you  be  bitten  by  a  dog,  if  you  are  a  sensible  person,  not
nervous  or  easily  scared,  have  not  read  too  many  highly  colored  and  sensa-
tional "mad  dog"  items  in  the  newspapers  (which  kill  more  people  than
dogs  do),  and  keep  your  sober  senses  about  you,  don't  believe  or  pay  any
attention  to  what  your  supposed  friends  say,  when  they  tell  you  "how
sorry  they  are,"  and  bestow  on  you  a  look  of  pity,  but  go  about  your  busi-
ness as  usual;  forget  the  affair,  and  you  will  never  go  mad.  If  you  believe
all  you  read  and  hear  as  to  going  mad,  lose  your  nerve  and  senses  and  get
scared,  it's  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  "go  mad"  and  die.
If  this  is  not  logic,  why  have  I  not  gone  mad  years  ago?  I  was  bitten
a  couple  of  years  ago  by  a  Yorkshire  terrier  brought  to  me  that  was  suf-
fering from  what  a  very  good  veterinary  surgeon  in  Cincinnati  had  diagnos-
ed as  dumb  rabies  in  this  dog.  I  could  not  take  the  dog  to  treat,  as  I
was  just  starting  .on  a  trip,  so  sent  the  animal  to  a  veterinary  surgen,  who
took  him  to  treat.  This  dog,  after  biting  me,  also  bit  him,  and  the  dog
died  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  doctor  held  a  post-mortem  examination  and
told  me  it  was  a  case  of  dumb  rabies;  but  the  doctor  and  I  are  both  living.
Find  me  a  doctor  who  can  cure  hydrophobia,  and  then  I  will  be  glad
to  have  him  explain  to  me  what  the  disease  is.  If  he  can  do  this,  then  I'll
try  to  believe  there  is  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia.  If  he  can't  cure  it,  he
doesn't  know  what  it  is,  for  there  is  in  this  enlightened  age  a  cure  for  every
disease;  but  you  must  first  know  what  ycu  are  trying  to  cure,  or  you  won't
cure  it.
Every  summer  the  papers  are  full  of  mad  dog  victims;  but  our  best
authorities  who  do  believe  in  hydrophobia  will  tell  you  that  summer,  or
in  hot  weather,  is  not  the  season  of  the  year  that  dogs  go  mad.  You  read
of  the  person  dying  in  great  agony;  that  he  bites  and  barks,  etc.,  etc.  So
he  apparently  does,  I  will  admit,  as  I  know  of  some  authenticated  cases  like
this,  but  the  "barking  and  biting"  could  easily  be  explained  if  the  atten-
dants and  friends  who  saw  it  were  not  all  themselves  scared  and  off  their
base  and  had  let  imagination  make  them  so — all  due  to  the  scare  that  comes
to  so  many  from  the  awful  word  "hydrophobia"  and  the  many  vivid  and
overdrawn  accounts  they  have  read  in  the  papers  gotten  up  by  a  very  bright
reporter  who  had  to  furnish  something  sensational  for  his  paper.  It's  just
like  the  cry  of  "fire"  to  so  many  people,  who  often  lose  their  lives  by  not
retaining  their  senses  about  them  and  in  most  cases  of  this  kind  taking
their  time  and  getting  safely  out  of  the  burning  building,  instead  of  either
jumping  out  of  a  high  window  to  be  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  pavement  below
or  getting  .crushed  to  death  in  the  mad  rush  of  the  others.
In  case  you  are  bitten  by  a  dog,  see  to  it  that  the  dog  is  not  killed,
but  that  he  is  confined  and  well  taken  care  of  for  a  few  weeks,  at  least
until  you  can  see  and  know  for  yourself  that  he  was  not  mad,  and  then
you  can  drop  the  matter.  What  an  insane  idea  it  is  to  kill  the  dog  after  he
has  bitten  you,  for  then  you  will  never  know  whether  he  was  mad  or  not,
and  the  constant  dread  and  fear  will  always  be  with  you,  and  probably —
if  you  are  of  a  nervous  disposition — may  yet  cause  you  to  "go  mad"  and
die.  I  have  often  been  called  in  to  put  a  poor  dog  out  of  the  way  that  was
supposed  to  be  mad  (and  I  chloroformed  it  according  to  orders  from  its
owner),  thinking  to  myself  at  the  time  that  it  was  better  for  the  dog  than
to  live  and  be  cared  for  by  an  idiot  who  did  not  know  near  as  much  as
the  poor  dog,  who  was  in  serious  trouble,  of  course,  but  due  to  some  natural
cause  and  not  to  so-called  hydrophobia.  Sometimes,  however,  out  of  pity
for  the  dog,  when  I  saw  he  had  a  chance  to  live  if  properly  treated,  I  have
asked  to  be  allowed  to  take  the  dog  to  my  kennels,  and  I  went  to  work
and  saved  the  pooi*  fellow.  I  am  deeply  in  earnest  in  my  views  oil  this"
much-mooted  suhject,  and  I  believe  that  thousands  of  people  would  be  alive
today  that  have  died  from  hydrophobia  if  they  would  look  at  the  matter
os  I  do  and  act  accordingly.  Many  poor  dogs  have  fits  hi  summer,  due  to
many  causes,  but  they  could  nearly  all  have  been  cured  ii  properly  treated
in  time,  and  as  all  important  diseases  are  treated  in  this  book,  if  you  will
follow  its  teachings  your  dog  will  live  until  the  time  comes  for  him  to  pass
in  his  checks  and  go  to  "dog  heaven"  with  the  rest  of  the  good  canines
gone  before.
A  hard  question  for  you  or  any  doctor  to  answer  is,  "Why  have  I
not  gone  mad"  when  it  is  a  fact  not  to  be  denied  that  I  have  been  bitten
bitten  by  so-called  mad  dogs?  I  am  willing  to  be  convinced  that  I  am  wrong,
if  it  can  be  done.  While  I  may  be  taking  up  too  much  space  on  this  subject,
yet  it  is  an  important  one.  I  will  next  give  two  interviews  that  were  pub-
lished in  March,  1896,  in  a  St.  Louis  paper  that  may  interest  and  benefit
some:
"Prof.  Al.  G.  Eberhart,  who  came  to  St.  Louis  last  v/eek  to  assume
active  charge  of  the  preparations  for  the  bench  show,  is  a  man  who  has  spent
the  better  part  of  his  life  raising  and  caring  for  dogs,  and  his  opinion  upon
this  subject  is  that  of  an  authority.      Prof.  Eberhart  says:
"  '1  nave  been  bitten  by  dogs  over  a  hundred  times  in  my  life  and  carry
scars  now  that  I've  had  for  twenty-five  years.  Some  of  these  so-called  mad
dogs  have  bitten  me,  but  yet  I  am  not  mad.  I  have  been  bitten  by  dogs
that  veterinary  surgeons  and  regular  physicians  have  pronounced  and  diag-
nosed as  having  rabies,  but  I  didn't  go  mad  because  I've  yet  to  see  a  genuine
mad  dog.  Had  I  been  nervous  and  easily  scared  I  would  very  likely  have
been  buried  long  ago.  Some  ten  years  ago  a  young  lady  in  New  York  City
was  bitten  by  her  pet  dog,  and,  not  wanting  to  have  it  killed,  it  was  sent
to  Harry  Jennings,  the  dog  fancier.  The  dog  bit  him  several  times.  The
young  lady  died  in  three  weeks  from  alleged  hydrophobia,  and  Harry
Jennings  is  alive  yet.  The  young  lady  died  from  fright.  This  I  know  to
be  a  fact.  Find  me  a  doctor  that  can  tell  what  hydrophobia  is,  then  I'll
try  to  believe  there  is  such  a  disease.  If  the  doctor  can't  tell  you  what
the  disease  is,  he  surely  can't  cure  it.  When  a  dog  bites  you,  if  it  is  on
any  part  of  your  body  where  you  can  get  your  mouth  to  it  as  soon  as  bitten,
suck  the  wound,  thus  quickly  abstracting  the  poison  if  any  there,  spit  it  out
and  forget  that  you  were  bitten  by  a  dog,  for  depend  on  it  this  ends  the
matter  there  and  then.  You  have  gotten  rid  of  the  poison  before  it  was
distributed  through  the  system.  If  on  any  part  of  the  body  you  can't  get
at,  get  a  friend  to  do  it  for  you.  Another  method  that  is  good  is  to  at  once
wash  the  wound  with  water.  Then  apply  the  actual  cautery,  a  piece  of  iron
heated  to  white  heat,  not  to  the  flesh,  but  hold  it  about  half  an  inch  from
it.  The  intense  heat  causes  but  little  pain  and  will  destroy  the  bacilli  of
rabies  to  the  depth  of  one-quarter  of  an  inch.  If  carbolic  or  nitric  acid  or
nitrate  of  silver  is  used,  not  five  minutes  should  elapse,  as  unless  properly
performed  inside  of  ten  minutes  it  is  not  only  useless  but  positively  injur-
ious as  the  poison  of  rabies  will  have  been  distributed  throughout  the  sys-
tem in  this  time.'  "
The  following  appeared  editorially  in  the  St.  Louis  Republic  of  Febru-
ary 24,  1896:  "The  interview  with  Prof.  Al.  G.  Eberhart,  Superintendent  of
the  St.  Louis  bench  show,  which  was  printed  in  the  Sunday  Post-Dispatch,
in  which  Prof.  Eberhart  made  the  assertion  that  he  had  never  seen  a
genuine  case  of  hydrophobia,  and  that  he  believed  that  cases  that  resulted
in  what  was  diagnosed  as  rabies  from  the  effects  of  dog  bites  were  the
result  of  imagination,  has  created  much  talk  and  considerable  comment.
"Prof.  Eberhart  was  called  upon  Saturday  by  a  Post-Dispatch  re-
porter, and  asked  if  he  could  make  his  position  as  a  disbeliever  in  the  ex-
istence of  the  disease  plainer  than  those  reasons  given  in  the  short  letter
in  last   Sunday's   Post-Dispatch.
"  'Yes,'  said  the  Professor,  'I  believe  that  I  can.  When  I  said  that
I  had  never  seen  a  genuine  case  of  hydrophobia  I  meant  it.  I  have  seen
many  dogs  that  were  thought  to  be  mad,  but  have  never  yet  seen  one  that
HYDROi'llOlSiA  185
1  Was  thoroughly  Satisfied  was  afflicted  with  rabies.  If  people  would  save
the  lives  of  dogs  suspected  of  being  thus  affected,  we  might  in  time  have
an  understanding  of  the  subject  by  studying  the  sick  dogs.  But  the  first
thing  that  happens  to  a  dog  when  he  shows  signs  of  anything  wrong  is  to
immediately  suspect  it  of  being  mad,  and  after  that  it  is  a  very  short  time
until  its  existence  is  ended  by  a  bullet  through  the  head,  and  the  most  val-
uable evidence  in  the  case  is  destroyed.  If  the  dog  had  been  spared  and
confined,  if  he  had  been  mad,  the  fact  could  have  been  easily  determined,
and  he  could  be  destroyed  after  the  evidence  was  complete  that  it  was  a
case  of  rabies  without  a  shadow  of  doubt.  But  this  course  is  seldom  pursued,
and  the  dog  that  has  bitten  any  one  in  a  spasm.it  makes  no  matter  what
was  the  foundation  for  his  pain,  is  immediately  killed  without  regard  to  his
value,  and  the  bitten  party  left  to  suffer  the  torments  of  uncertainty  as  to
whether  he  or  she  was  inoculated  with  the  virus  of  hydrophobia  or  not.
"  'Now  here  is  a  case  in  point,'  continued  the  professor.  'Last  week,
just  before  I  came  to  St.  Louis,  a  gentleman  called  on  me  one  evening  at
my  home  in  Cincinnati  and  said  that  he  had  just  taken  his  pet  dog  to  the
police  station  near  my  house  to  be  shot;  that  he  thought  that  the  dog  had
gone  mad,  and  to  be  on  the  safe  side  he  had  decided  to  have  him  destroyed,
and  had  brought  him  to  the  station  house  for  that  purpose.  It  was  with
much  reluctance  that  he  did  this,  however,  as  the  dog  was  a  household  pet,
and  its  death  would  be  keenly  felt  and  its  presence  missed.  The  policeman
who  was  on  duty  at  the  time  suggested  that,  as  I  lived  near  the  station  he
could  call  me  over  to  look  at  the  dog.  I  assured  the  gentleman  that  I
would  go  over  to  the  station  in  a  few  minutes,  and  if  I  could  do  anything
for  the  animal  I  would  use  the  extent  of  my  abilities,  and  he  returned  home.
"  'After  I  had  finished  my  dinner  I  went  over  to  the  police  station  and
found  that  the  Sergeant  had  arrived.  I  asked  him  if  he  had  the  dog.
"  'Yes,  said  he;  'he's  in  that  cage  there."
"  'Bring  him  out,'  said   I.
"  'Not  on  your  life,'  replied  the  Sergeant.  'I  wouldn't  touch  that  dog
for  all  the  money  in  Hamilton  County.  Why,  man,  he's  mad;  I  won't  go
near  him.  If  you  want  to  be  foolish  enough  to  try  and  do  anything  with
him,  go  and  unlock  the  cell  yourself;  I  think  he  ought  to  be  shot  without
delay.'
"  'Well,  I  went  over  to  the  cell  and  saw  the  dog.  He  was  a  little
Italian  greyhound,  as  fragile-looking  as  a  long-stemmed  wine  glass.  The
poor  little  fellow  was  in  the  throes  of  a  hard  spasm  as  I  looked  at  him.
He  had  his  delicate,  slender,  head  thrust  between  the  bars  in  his  pain,  and
his  hind-quarters  were  jammed  in  between  the  two  adjoining  uprights.  He
looked  up  at  me  with  fear  showing  out  of  his  sick,  brown  eyes,  but  be-
trayed no  signs  of  dog  madness.  He  was  so  weak  and  trembling  that  he
could  scarcely  stand.
"  'I  unlocked  the  cell  door  and  went  in  and  picked  the  little  fellow
up,  and  after  soothing  him  and  getting  him  quieted  down  a  little,  I  admin-
istered a  dose  of  a  fractional  part  of  a  grain  of  morphine  to  ease  his  im-
mediate pain,  and  carried  him  away.  A  little  later  I  gave  him  a  small  dose
of  castor  oil  and  put  him  to  bed.  I  sat  up  with  that  dog  until  3  o'clock
in  the  morning,  and  after  he  was  relieved  by  the  oil  he  was  well,  and,
barring  the  weakness  resulting  from  his  terrific  spasms  of  the  night  before,
he  was  perfectly  sound.'  "
(I  forgot  to  state  in  this  interview  that  before  leaving  the  dog,  and
after  the  oil,  I  gave  him  a  dose  of  worm  medicine;  result  was  a  lot  of
worms  passed,  and  here  was  the  cause  of  this  "mad  dog.")
"  'After  I  had  arisen  in  the  morning  I  telephoned  the  owner  of  the
dog  to  come  and  get  his  pet,  He  came,  and  his  gratitude  was  manifest
in  the  way  he  greeted  the  little  fellow  that  he  had  condemned  to  death  the
night  before,
"  'Now,  supposing  that  the  dog  had  bitten  the  Police  Sergeant.  The
Sergeant  was  firmly  convinced  that  the  dog  was  afflicted  with  the  rabies,
and  if,  by  any  possibility  the  dog  had  bitten  him  he  would  have  worried
himself  until  it  would  have  perhaps  resulted  in  an  attack  of  hydrophobia,
The  clog  would  have  been  immediately  killed,  and  thus  all  evidence  that
there  was  no  rabies  manifested  in  the  animal  would  have  been  destroyed,
and  another  name  would  have  been  added  to  the  list  of  supposed  victims  to
this  terrible  disease,  delusion,  or  whatever  you  choose  to  term  it.
"  'But  what  was  really  the  matter  with  the  dog,  Professor?'  queried
the  Post-Dispatch  man.
"  'Worms,'  said  Prof.  Eberhart,  'nothing  but  worms.  And  let  me  tell
you  that  at  the  bottom  of  nearly  every  illness  to  which  a  dog  is  subjected
you  will  find  worms  to  be  the  cause.  In  fact,  they  cause  eight-tenths  of  all
the  deaths  in  the  canine  world.  If  owners  would  keep  their  dogs'  bowels
open  with  an  occasional  dose  of  some  purgative  there  would  be  many  less
cases  of  "mad  dogs"  like  that  poor  little,  shivering,  sick  Italian  greyhound
lying   on   the   sold   stone  floor   of  that   Cincinnati   station   cell.
"  'But  that  wasn't  the  end  of  that  case,'  continued  the  Professor,  'and
this  part  of  it  shows  just  how  little  this  question  of  mad  dogs  is  undersood.
After  I  had  gone  down  town  to  my  office  the  same  morning  the  dog  had
been  taken  home,  his  owner,  who  had  called  for  him  in  the  morning,
came  in.
"  'Now,  Professor,'  said  he,  'I  know  and  you  know  that  our  dog  is
all  right,  but  my  wife  has  been  worrying  all  night  about  him,  and  she
was  so  frightened  yesterday  over  his  wild  running  and  jumping  that  noth-
ing but  a  personal  visit  from  you  will  reassure  her  and  quiet  her  fears,
and  I  wish  you  would  call  at  my  house  and  see  her.
"  'I  went  out  to  the  gentleman's  residence  and  talked  to  his  wife.  I
told  her  how  her  dog  would  act  under  certain  conditions.  I  asked  her,  if
her  infant  was  thrown  into  spasms  from  worms  if  she  would  be  afraid  of
contracting  hydrophobia  from  it.  I  showed  her  that  an  ailment  affected
a  dog  exactly  as  it  would  a  human.  She  was  a  sensible  woman  and  saw
the  point  at  once,  and  I  am  sure  there  will  be  no  more  "rabies"  in  her  dogs.
"  'Now,  I  know  of  another  case,'  said  the  professor,  'where  a  small
child  was  bitten  and  a  fearful  gash  cut  by  the  dog's  teeth  clean  to  the
skull,  and  that  dog  died  two  days  later  with  all  the  aversion  to  water  that
they  claim  is  an  infallible  symptom  of  hydrophobia,  that  he  could  manifest
still  the  little  boy  did  not  have  rabies,  and  simply  because  he  was  too  small
to  take  part  in  his  parents'  worry  over  the  outcome  of  the  bite.'  "
The  following  appeared  editorially  in  the  St.  Louis  Republic,  Feb.  24,
1896:
"Is  the  Mad  Dog  a  Myth?
"This  is  far  from  dog-day  time,  but  The  Republic  trusts  that  the  optim-
ism of  the  St.  Louis  Bench  Show's  Superintendent  will  be  treasured  by  ner-
vous mothers  for  use  next  August.  He  says  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as
poisonous  rabies  in  dogs.
"It  is  curious  that  every  man  who  has  handled  great  numbers  of  dogs
bears  the  same  testimony.
"There  is  danger  of  blood  poisoning  as  a  result  of  any  animal's  bite;
and  there  is  lock-jaw  as  the  extreme  effect  of  blood  poisoning.  But  the  men
who  have  been  longest  in  charge  of  dogs  agree  that  there  is  no  rabid  con-
dition when  a  bite  is  more  dangerous  than  at  any  other  time;  and  that  a
dog's  bite  at  any  time  is  no  more  dangerous  than  the  scratch  of  a  cat.
"It  does  seem  that  they  ought  to  know.  For  the  sake  of  humanity's
peace  of  mind  the  doctors  should  find  out  whether  the  experience  of  men
who  have  been  bitten  dozens  of  times  is  worth  anything."
Harry  W.  Lacy  recently  wrote  in  the  American  Stockkeeper  on  this