transmitted.  True  mange  resembles  itch  in  man,  as  it  is  due  to  a  small
parasite  that  burrows  or  tunnels  through  the  skin  in  all  directions,  draw-
ing its  nourishment  therefrom.  The  female  deposits  her  eggs  In  the  canals
formed,  which  hatch  out  in  about  two  weeks;  the  young  continue  bur-
rowing and  occasion  intense  itching.  True  mange  is  entirely  a  local  affec-
tion, and  the  uneasiness  and  loss  of  sleep  causes  the  animal  to  continually
scratch  and  bite  itself  in  Its  vain  efforts  to  allay  the  intolerable  pain  and
itching.  This  has  a  very  debilitating  effect  upon  the  system,  and  will  soon
transform   a   healthy  and  sleek   coated  pet  into  a  loathsome  object.
The  cause  is  invariably  the  result  of  having   met  some  dog  or  other
animal  that  w*§  affected  with  mange.    One  dog  meeting  another  or  occu-
pying  his  kennel  or  sleeping  quarters,  or  being  shipped  in  a  crate  that
was  used  by  a  dog  with  mango,  will  surely  contract  it.  Absolute  clean-
liness is  necessary  in  the  treatment  of  mange.  When  your  dog  shows
signs  of  mange,  remove  it  immediately  from  its  quarters  to  new  ones,
burn  the  bedding  it  has  used,  wash  its  kennel  with  boiling  water,  to  which
has  been  added  the  Standard  Disinfectant,  or  Sanitas  (See  advertisement
of  both  in  this  book).  Either  one,  if  thoroughly  applied,  will  destroy
every  parasite  in  the  kennel.
Now  give  your  dog  a  good  bath  with  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap,  using  quite  as
Warm  water  as  the  dog  c ■ : i ii  stand,  cleansing  its  entire  body  and  opening  the
pores  of  the  skin.  After  drying  the  dog  thoroughly,  then  apply  Eberhart's
Skin  Cure  all  over  the  dog,  rubbing  it  in  well  with  your  bands  and  not.
missing  a  spot  on  tbe  dog's  body,  for  if  yon  do  you  leave  some  parasites
— a  very  busy  and  industrious  pest  they  are — and  in  a  day  later  many  new-
born ones  would  be  hard  at  work  again.  Take  plenty  Of  lime  in  putting
on  'this  skin  cure,  using  "plenty  of  elbow  grease,*'  applying  it  the  same
as  you  would  a  liniment.  Repeal  this  the  next  day,  and  probably  Eor  two
days  more,  the  bath  not  being  strictly  essential  except  the  first  day.  If
you  wish,  or  the  dog  is  a  house  dog.  you  can  give  It  a  bath  after  the  skin
cure  has  been  on  for  ball'  an  hour,  for  it  has  then  done  its  work,  this  bath
simply  to  put  the  dog  in  more  presentable  and  cleaner  shape,  as  all  skin
or  mange  cures  contain  oil  of  some  kind  and  are  therefore  greasy.  There
are  several   good   mange  cures  aside   I'tom   mine.
Ordinarily  a  case  of  mange  should  be  cured  in  a  week  or  two,  and
after  three  or  four  applications  all  over  the  dog,  it  is  only  necessary  to
apply  it  daily  to  the  sore  places,  or  where  no  hair,  as  my  skin  remedy  is,
also,  a  great  hair  grower,  and  never  fails  to  restore  the  hair,  unless  tbe
hair  roots  have  been  destroyed — when  nothing  will  bring  back  the  hair.
It  is  not  necessary  to  change  the  food  in  treating  mange.
A  very  good  mange  euro  is  the  following:
Train  oil    ""4    gallon
Venice  turpentine    2  ounces
Oil   of  tar    y2    ounce
Lac   Sulphur    • 1   pound
First  mix  the  oil  and  turpentine  and  then  add  the  oil  of  tar  and  sulphur.
Your  druggist  may  not  have  train  oil,  as  it  is  often  hard  to  procure.  If  so,
common    "black    oil"    or    crude    petroleum    will    do   just   as   well.
All  mange  cures  should   bo  applied   the  same  as  directed  in  vising  mine.
■"■""he  following,  as  a  dip,  was  recommended  by  a  friend,  who  used  it  in
his  kem.ols.  The  only  objection  I  can  see  is  that  it  would  not  do  to  use
in  cold  weather:
"For  quick  cure  of  mange  use  1  quart  of  Standard  Oil  of  Tar  to  10
quarts  of  water;  have  water  as  hot  as  possible  without  scalding  or  burning
band,  mix  thoroughly,  place  liquid  In  small  narrow  tub,  one  that  will  just
f»l  the  dog  if  possible;  place  dog  In  tub,  take  >.  cup  and  pour  the  liquid  all
ovur  him,  Beginning  at  head,  just  below  ears;  saturate  dog  thoroughly,
loosen  up  all  old  scabs,  applying  well  tbe  eure  to  affected  parts.    Take  stiff
brush,  wet  with  liquid,  brush  dog  thoroughly;  remove  dog  from  tub,  give
him  a  bed  of  clean  straw  to  roll  in,  do  not  rinse  off  with  clean  water  or
rub  skin  dry.  Do  not  allow  dog  to  roll  in  dirt  immediately  after  his
wash,  as  he  will  if  not  chained  up  or  placed  in  a  room.  Rolling  in  sand
after  a  wash  will  irritate  the  sores  and  make  the  cure  all  the  harder.  When
about  dry.  the  sore  spots  may  be  touched  up  with  equal  parts  of  water
and  Standard  Oil  of  Tar.  In  curing  mange,  the  bedding  must  be  changed
every  day,  wash  all  woodwork  where  dog  rubs,  once  every  week  with  hot
waicr  in   which  has  been  placed   Standard   Oil   of  Tar."
There  is  no  use  in  taking  medicine  unless  you  follow  your  doctor's
advice,  so  don't  expect  the  desired  result  unless  you  follow  directions,  as
one  or  two  applications  will  not  effect  a  cure  in  a  case  Of  mange.  Mange
can  be  cured,  no  matter  how  bad  a  case  it  appears  to  be,  if  you  go  at  it
right  and  have  the  right  remedy,  in  fact,  it  is  one  of  the  easiest  to  cure  of
all  troubles.  The  reason  why  so  many  people  dread  this  disease  is  be-
cause of  their  failure  to  cure  what  they  wrongly  suppose  is  mange,  when
it  perhaps  is  eczema,  which  is  a  much  longer  story,  but  can  also  be  cured
and  the  treatment  of  which  is  given  under  that  heading.  Remember,  that*
if  you  have  more  than  one  dog,  the  others  will  get  it  unless  the  afflicted
one  is  removed  and  isolateu  in  time.  The  advantage  of  having  a  regular
kennel  or  place  for  each  dog  to  sleep  is  manifest  in  treating  the  dog  for
mange,  as  thus  you  can  disinfect  his  kennel  and  destroy  the  bedding,  which
are  both  infected,  whereas,  if  your  dog  was  sleeping  any  place  he  wanted
to  in  your  house,  this  would  be  a  very  difficult  matter,  and  while  you  cured
him  he  could  again  contract  it  by  coming  in  contact  with  the  parasites  that
had    not    been    destroyed.
You  need  not  have  any  fear  of  con  i  racting  mange  from  your  dog;
I  have  treated  many  cases  for  years  past  and  never  got  it — not  transmit-
able  from  the  dog  to  man.
There  are  several  skin  diseases  called  by  different  names,  or  desig-
nated as  different  kinds  of  mange,  but  the  treatment  I  have  given  for
mange,  and  the  one  for  eczema,  about  covers  the  whole  ground  of  skin
trouble,  or,  my  remedy  will  cure  them  all,  excepting  that  in  some  of  them,  as
in  eczema,  internal  remedies  must  also  be  used  at  the  same  time  to  work
on  the  blood.  Eczema  is  fully  treated  elsewhere.  Carbolic  acid  is  used
in  many  mange  cures,  a  dangerous  ingredient  unless  carefully  used  and
in    small    quantities.
My  long-time  friend,  Harry  \Y.  Lacy,  editor  of  American  Fancier  and
Stock-keeper,   has   this   to   say   of   mange      read    it    also:
"It  is  quite  true  that  eczema  or  red  mange  is  to  some  extent  con-
tagious, but  we  have  not  found  it  to  be  so  to  any  extent  which  would  justify
the  term  being  applied  to  it.  It  is  desirable,  always  to  keep  a  dog  affected
with  skin  disease  away  from  other  dogs,  because  constant  contact  in  the
kennel  or  at  play  is  liable  to  give  rise  to  an  exchange  of  skin  complaint.
On  the  other  hand,  a  dog  with  distemper,  which  is  very  contagious,  is  made
to  give  it  to  animals  which  never  come  mar  to  him,  and  a  dog  with
fleas  will  furnish  a  supply  to  ail  his  fellows  in  the  neighborhood.  In  most
cases  mange  is,  however,  not  due  to  contact  by  the  victim  with  another
mangy  cur,  but  is  due  to  out-and-out  neglect.  Mange  is  never  known  in
kennels  where  the  dogs  are  properly  looked  after;  it  is  a  cultivation  of  the
back-yard,  and  thrives  best  upon  the  poor  chained-up  brute  that  is  more
human  than  his  owner  who  keeps  him  chained  there'.  In  a  word,  filth  ia
the  soil   on  which  alone  the  sarcoptic  parasite  can  thrive.
"A  dog  with  ordinary  skin  irritation,  developing  into  redness  and
rash,  has  acquired  that  in  one  of  two  ways.  Either  he  has  an  hereditary
predisposition  to  skin  complaint  (and  here  let  it  be  said  that  this  heredi-
tary predisposition  is  a  very  common  fact,  and  is  due  undoubtedly  in  a
great  measure  to  the  in-breeding  which  has  been  carried  on  to  a  greater  or
less  extent  in  all  breeds)  or  else  he  is  suffering  from  impurity  in  the  blood
which  may  be  clue  to  over-feeding  or  liver  complaint  or  want  of  sufficient
exercise  or  any  one  of  a  dozen  other  things.  If  the  former  be  the  case  it  is
by  no  means  probable  that  a  cure  will  be  effected,  and  the  most  important
thing  that  can  be  done  is  in  the  direction  of  preventing  the  disease  from
being  handed  down  to  other  generations.  If  it  is  intended  to  breed  from
the  dog  it  should  be  mated  with  the  newest  blood  possible — that  is  to  say
with  an  animal  having  a  very  different  pedigree  from  its  own.  The  disease
is  certain  to  reappear  even  after  the  dog  has  been  apparently  cured.  A
^hange  of  diet  or  of  weather  will  always  be  liable  to  precipitate  a  fresh
attack."
The  following  treatise  on  mange  was  written  by  Dalziel,  and  to  it  your
attention  is  called.     A  very  able  handling  of  the  subject:
Sarcoptic  Mange — The  mite  producing  this  most  nearly  resembles  the
itch-mite  of  man,  and  as  it  is  propagated  by  eggs,  and  transmitted  by
contact,  direct  or  indirect,  there  seems  nothing  impossible  in  the  idea  of
stamping  out  this  chief  "enemy  to  the  comfort  of  a  brave  spaniel,"  if  only
we  could  get  every  clog  owner  to  be  careful  and  clean.  There  is  much  virtue
in  an  "if;"  but  at  least  we  can  learn  from  the  facts  about  the  mange-mite
that  we  need  not  harbor  it  in  our  own  kennels,  and  by  stamping  it  out
there,  lessen  it  generally.  Dirt  unquestionably  harbors  and  encourages
mange,  although  it  does  not  produce  it;  left  undisturbed  by  cleansing  pro-
cesses,  the   pests   breed   and   multiply  with   great   rapidity.
When  the  mite  reaches  the  dog,  it  burrows  into  the  skin;  the  pro-
cess, and  also  a  poisonous  fluid  discharged  by  the  creature,  causes  intol-
erable itching,  and  to  relieve  this  the  dog  scratches,  with  the  result  that
the  skin  is  broken,  small  red  points  appear,  and  these  become  pustular
and  discharge  a  fluid  which  dries  or  crusts  and  forms  a  scab;  the  hair
falls  off.  The  multiplication  of  the  original  cause  of  the  evil  is  rapid,  and,
left  unchecked,  the  whole  surface  of  the  body  soon  becomes  involved,
while  the  poor  dog  is  an  object  of  pity,  and  from  want  of  rest  and  other
causes  sinks  into  a  helpless  condition.  This  state  is  often  called  virulent
or  scabby  mange,  and  presents  many  of  the  characteristics  of  Blotch.  The
skin  is  harsh,  dry,  and  rough,  until  small  pimples  appear,  when  therefrom
oozes  a  purulent  matter,  forming  scabs,  which  mat  the  hair  together,  and
bring  it  off  in  patches  as  the  dog  rubs  or  scratches  himself.  The  back,
breast,  and  inside  of  the  thighs  are  generally  the  first  places  attacked,  and
every  crease  and  wrinkle  in  the  skin  becomes  inflamed  and  moist  with  the
irritating  discharge.  If  the  disease  is  left  unchecked,  it  soon  extends  over
the  whole  body,  reducing  the  dog  to  a  deplorable  condition,  disgusting  to
all  who  see  him  and  intolerable  to  himself.  These  are  severe  and  extreme
eases.     In  others  a  dry,  scurfy  mange  exists,  marked  by  little  red  spots,
'    ~
and  confined  to  the  joints  of  the  legs,  over  the  eyes,  the  flaps  of  the  ears,
etc.:  and  this  may  exist  for  some  time  without  other  damage  than  causing
the  dog  great  uneasiness  and  injury  to  his  appearance  by  partially  destroy-
ing the  hair  and  robbing  it  of  its  natural  glossy  appearance.
The  first  thing  to  be  done  with  a  mangy  dog  is  to  wash  him.  Let  him
have  a  good  sousing  and  scrubbing  with  a  good  soap  and  water,  "hottish
rather  but  not  so  boiling  as  to  turn  him  red;"  dry  well  with  a  soft  cloth,
which  mast  immediately  be  boiled,  and  then  dress  him  with  one  or  the
other  of  the  several  well  known  mange  cures.  Whatever  you  use,  see  that
it  is  applied  thoroughly;  see  that  it  reaches  the  skin  where  the  mites  are,
and  is  not  merely  left  on  the  hair.  Chronic  cases  of  mange  often  take  a
month  or  two  to  cure.  Sulphur  is  given  as  an  internal  remedy  for  mange,
but  it  is  not  of  any  use,  in  mange.
Follicular  Mango  is  due  to  another  mite  (Demodex  folloculorum),  very
different  in  appearance  from  the  other  (Saroptes),  which  are  short  and
thick,  whereas  this,  the  Demodex,  is  elongated,  and  with  a  long,  obtuse
tail.  These  parasites  differ  in  their  habits,  the  Demodex  living  in  the
hair-follicles,  and  burrowing  deep  under  the  skin  in  the  sebaceous  gland
that  supplies  the  unctous  matter  to  protect  the  skin  and  keep  it  soft.
The  depth  to  which  the  Demodex  burrows  renders  Follicular  Mange  much
lets  easy  of  transmission  between  dogs;  but  it  also  makes  a  cure  much
more  difficult,  as  the  parasites  are  hard  to  reach.  This  mite  is  identical
with  a  parasite  found  in  the  human  skin  causing  some  disfiguration  of
the  face,  but  further  than  that  it  does  no  harm  until  transferred  to  the
dog,  when  it  causes  a  most  repulsive  disease,  and  one  very  difficult  to
•radicate.
Some  few  yean  ago  Mr.  Wm.  Hunting,  F.R.S.V.S.,  in  conjunction  with
Profes»or  Duguid,  made  a  series  of  investigations  and  experiments  in  eluci-
dation of  this  disease,  and  the  following  description  of  symptoms  and
the  diagnosis  are  from  an  article  by  the  former  gentleman,  which  appeared
in  the  Veterinary  Journal,  and  afterward  in  pamphlet  form:
"The  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  seldom  seen  in  the  first  stages;  they
consist  merely  of  circumscribed  spots  from  which  the  hair  fallsy  and  upon
which  are  noticeable  a  few  small  pimples.  These  patches  extend  rapidly,  and
fresh  ones  appear  on  other  parts.  Any  portion  of  the  skin  may  be  affected,
but  the  head,  legs,  belly,  and  sides,  are  usually  the  seat  of  the  disease.
The  affected  places  are  almost  hairless,  and  what  hair  remains  is  easily
pulled  out;  small  pimples  and  pustules  stud  the  surface,  the  latter  varying
in  size  from  a  pin's  head  to  that  of  a  pea.  The  confluence  of  the  pustules,
and  the  discharge  of  their  contents,  give  rise  to  scabs;  these  crack  and
bleed,  and  so  produce  a  most  repulsive  appearance.  In  white-haired  dogs
Ihe  skin  is  red;  in  all  it  is  extremely  hot,  and  emits  an  unpleasant  odor.
The  irritation  does  not  excite  much  scratching,  but  the  dog  frequently
shakes  himself.  More  pain  than  itshing  seems  to  accompany  the  disease.
In  cases  where  the  whole  body  is  affected  loss  of  condition  is  most  marked;
and  in  cold  weather  the  almost  total  loss  of  hair  may  cause  death,  if  the
animal  be  not  kept  in  a  warm  place.  This  stage,  too,  is  always  accom-
panied by  ravenous  appetite,  due,  probably,  to  the  rapid  loss  of  animal
heat.
"Diagnosis. — In  white  clogs  the  color  of  the  skin  may  cause  the  disease
to  be  mistaken  for  'Red  Mange'  or  'Eczema.'  The  circumscribed  spots  in
the  first  stages  may  be  confounded  with  some  forms  of  Tinea,  and  the  loss
of  hair  and  the  presence  of  scabs  seen  in  the  fully  developed  disease  may
easily  be  mistaken  for  ordinary  scabies.  The  pustules,  the  heat  of  the  skin,
and  the  comparatively  slight  itchiness  shown,  are,  however,  nearly  diagnos-
tic. Positive  diagnosis  can  only  be  made  by  the  aid  of  the  microscope  and
the  detection  of  the  parasite.  If  we  puncture  one  of  the  pustules,  and  mix
its  contents  on  a  slide  with  a  little  water,  the  acari  are  easily  discovered.
I  have  found  as  many  as  thirty  to  one  pustule.  Sometimes  we  may  detect
them  on  the  root  of  a  hair  removed  from  an  affected  spot.  With  a  low
power,  the  parasites  somewhat  resemble  sprats  or  minnows,  but  a  higher
power  shows  them  to  consist  of  a  head  and  body,  which  latter  terminates
in  a  long  and  obtusely  pointed  tail.  They  are  furnished  with  six  or  eight
legs  situated  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  body,  three  or  four  on  each  side.
The  head  consists  of  two  antennse  and  a  median  proboscis,  all  of  which
are  capable  of  being  moved  forward  or  backward.  The  legs  consist  of
three  segments.  The  movements  of  the  creatures  are  not  often  seen,  and
are  very  slow.  The  parasite  measures  about  one-hundredth  of  an  inch  in
length  by  one  five-hundredth  in  breadth."
"In  regard  to  treatment,  Fleming,  in  Veterinary  Sanitary  Science,  says
"The  situation  of  the  Demodex  renders  it  almost  inaccessible  to  parasi-
tical remedies;  the  disease  it  engenders  is  therefore  looked  upon  as  ex-
tremely troublesome,  and,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  almost  beyond  a  cure.
Often,  when  it  is  believed  to  be  extinguished,  it  reappears  in  all  its  viru-
lence in  one  or  two  months.  Nevertheless,  Zurn  asserts  that  he  has  fre-
quently succeeded  with  an  ointment  composed  of  1  part  of  benzine  to  4
parts  of  lard.  Zundel  states  that  the  balsam  of  Peru  has  often  yielded
good  results  when  the  malady  has  not  been  of  too  long  duration;  he  has
employed  it  dissolved  in  alcohol  (1  to  30)."
Symptoms  of  Scaroptic  Mange. — In  pronounced  cases  this  disease  is
easily  recognizable,  but  in  the  initial  stages,  when  the  hair  is  not  much
lost  or  broken,  if  complicated  with  eczema — which  is  not  uncommon —
diagnosis  is  more  difficult.
The  first  symptom  is  that  of  great  irritation  of  the  affected  parts,
especially  on  the  application  of  heat.
The  symptoms  first  appear  in  the  form  of  small  red  spots,  which  may
be  seen  on  the  head,  close  to  the  muzzle,  the  outside  of  the  roots  of  the
ears,  round  the  eyes  and  neck,  the  bottom  part  of  the  chest,  the  elbows,
the  soft  skin  of  the  stomach,  behind  the  thighs  and  the  feet.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  may  appear  on  any  part  of  the  body.  The
small  red  spots  resemble  flea  bites  on  the  human  skin.  These  red  spots
are  more  noticeable  when  situated  on  the  stomach  or  inside  the  thighs.
Little  blisters  appear  in  place  of  the  red  spots,  and  if  they  are  in
large  numbers  and  burst  open  sores  appear.
Injury  will  result  from  an  inoculation  of  the  skin  with  the  contents
of  the  blisters,  which  often  occurs  as  a  result  of  scratching  or  rubbing.
Doss  of  hair  will  follow  this,  and  is  caused  partly  by  the  scratching
and  partly  by  the  scaling  of  the  crusts  of  the  skin  caused  by  the  small
blisters  and  pimples.
Te  skin  then  becomes  thickened  and  hardened.  In  neglected  cases  the
general  health  is  very  much  affected,  as  the  animal  gets  little  rest,  and
in  weakly  subjects  generally  results  fatally.
Scaroptic  Mange  is  very  readily  communicated  to  the  human  subject,
and  is  the  cause  in  most  cases  of  what  is  termed  "Scabbies,"  and  is  far  more
common  than  is  generally  supposed.  But  Scaroptic  Mange  is  comparatively
easy  to  cure  if  taken  in  hand  rightly.  It  is  a  waste  of  time  to  simply
apply  a  mange  cure  to  the  affected  parts.  To  complete  a  cure  you  must
treat  your  dog  internally  as  well  as  externally  or  you  will  never  have  a
perfect  cure.
Here  is  where  I  should  try  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy — and  for  the
blood,  use  internally,  the  White  Sulphur,  as  advised  for  Eczema.  (See
Eczema).
Mouth,  Canker  of  the — This  is  generally  the  result  of  dainty  feeding
and  lack  of  exercise,  but  in  old  dogs  it  may  come  from  failing  teeth  and  want
of  masticating  power.  Either  or  both  of  these  causes  lead  to  disordered
stomach  and  foul  breath;  a  deposit  of  tartar  takes  place,  the  gums  and
lips  becoming  red,  inflamed,  and  spongy,  and  after  a  time  a  fetid  discharge
from  the  mouth,  and  often  accompanied  with  bleeding.  Old  animals  are
most  subject  to  this  trouble,  and  by  examining  you  will  probably  find  some
decayed  teeth,  the  gums  being  so  tender  that  in  attempting  to  eat,  the
dog  suffers  great  pain,  which  he  will  show  by  his  trying  to  chew  the  food
for  a  minute,  roll  it  about  in  his  mouth  and  then  drop  it.
To  cure  the  disease,  remove  the  cause.  If  you  have  been  cramming  the
dog  with  delicacies,  return  to  a  sensible  way  of  feeding  and  give  proper
exercise.  Examine  his  mouth  carefully  for  decayed  teeth,  and,  if  found,
remove  them  and  the  rotten  stumps  with  a  pair  of  suitable  forceps.  This
is  not  so  difficult  and  you  can  do  it  by  having  some  one  hold  the  dog's
head  firmly,  and  can  be  done  more  easily  than  may  be  supposed,  a  very
little  practice  making  any  one  efficient.  While  his  mouth  is  in  such  a
tender  state  he  must  have  food  that  requires  no  chewing,  as  well  as  to
keep  correct  his  disordered  stomach.  A  vegetable  diet  is  now  the  thing.
Give  him  quite  a  brisk  dose  of  the  following  pills:
Podophyllin     6   grains
Compound  extract  of  colocynth 30   grains
Powdered    rhubarb    48  grains
Extract  of  henbane   36   grains
Mix,  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills.     Give  for  grown   dogs  from
two  to  four  pills,  according  to  size.
After  a  dose  of  this,  then  use  the  following:
Extract  of  gentian    1   dram        i.
Powdered    rhubarb    3  6   grains