subject:  "One  would  think  that  a  man  having  intelligence  enough  to  write
editorials  on  a  leading  daily  paper  would  inform  himself  sufficiently  on  the
subject  not  to  make  such  a  foolish  statement  as  that  muzzling  dogs  was  a
sure  way  to  produce  hydrophobia,  but  this  is  what  a  Boston  Standard
editorial  said  last  week.  Probably  there  is  no  subject  about  which  the
average  newspaper  writer  gets  off  more  tommy  rot  than  hydrophobia  and
mad  dog  scares.
"These  hydrophobia  scares  are  mainly  due  to  the  sensational  imagina-
tion of  the  reporter  who  plays  upon  the  nervousness  of  a  public  only  too
ready  to  shy  a  stone  at  dog,  and  then  when  the  scare  has  assumed  suitable
proportions  and  a  muzzling  order  goes  forth,  these  writers  are  again  the
first  to  question  its  advisability  and  play  on  tbe  feeling  of  their  readers
who  may  own  dogs,  with  the  nonsensical  statement  alluded  to  above.
"The  very  rare  disease  called  hydrophobia  can  only  be  produced
through- inoculation  with  the  rabial  virus,  and  a  dog  might  mear  a  muzzle
to  the  end  of  his  natural  life,  and  unless  he  was  actually  bitten  by  a  rabid
dog  he  would  be  none  the  worse,  though,  according  to  his  temperament,
the  incubus  might  make  him  bad  tempered,  irritable,  and  so  excite  his  ner-
vous temperament  as  to  send  him  into  a  fit  wherein  he  would  probably  dis-
play some  of  those  symptoms  of  rabies  popularly,  but  erroneously,  asso-
ciated with  hydrophobia.
"If  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia  really  exists  in  a  locality  there  is  no
surer  method  to  stamp  it  out  than  a  general  muzzling  order  strictly  en-
forced. The  reason  is  obvious.  This  may  entail  hardship  on  individual
dogs,  but  the  good  of  the  others  and  the  community  at  large  demands  it.
"Speaking  of  hydrophobia  scares  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  the
Pasteur  Institute  in  New  York  has  done  more  to  keep  alive  an  unhealthy
state  of  public  mind  in  regard  to  the  disease  than  any  other  agency.  The
advent  of  new  patients  is  heralded  throughout  the  country,  and  patients
from  distant  states  are  treated  on  the  supposition  that  they  have  been  bit-
ten by  mad  dogs,  but  rarely  is  it  proved  that  the  dogs  were  really  rabid.
Still  they  undergo  the  treatment,  and  Dr.  Gibier  claims  credit  for  subse-
quent immunity."
Here  are  the  ideas  of  Dr.  H.  Clay  Glover,  of  New  York  City,  one  of  the
highest  authorities  on  canine  diseases  that  we  have  in  America:
Dr.  H.  Clay  Glover,  interviewed  on  the  muzzling  question  by  a  New
York  Herald  man,  was  asked  why  the  muzzle  was  unnecessary.  "Because,"
said  Dr.  Glover,  "it  is  of  no  possible  benefit  either  to  the  dog  or  public.  The
mad  dog  scare,  which  has  been  so  long  agitated,  is  a  myth,  and  one  calcu-
lated to  do  much  injury  by  the  introduction  of  false  hydrophobia  induced
by  fear.  During  my  long  experience  in  canine  practice  I  have  never  seen
but  one  case  of  authenticated  rabies.  I  have  been  called  to  see  hundreds
of  so-called  mad  dogs,  and  found  they  were  merely  in  convulsions,  afflicted
by  epilepsy  or  suffering  from  an  attack  of  indigestion  or  from  over  excite-
ment, all  of  which  yield  to  proper  treatment."
Another  very  able  authority  is  next  given:
In  the  Animal  World,  Mr.  Rotherhan,  a  canine  practitioner,  describes
the  differences  between  rabies,  apoplexy  and  epilepsy.  He  says:  "In  rabies
a  dog  never  foams  at  the  mouth,  its  tongue  and  lips  are  brown  and  hard-
looking,  the  discharge  from  the  mouth  is  small  in  quantity,  brownish  in
color  and  hangs  about  the  lips  like  strings  of  gum;  the  eyes  have  an  un-
natural glare.  In  apoplexy  there  is  sudden  loss  of  power,  the  dog  falls
down,  either  partially  or  wholly  insensible,  the  eyes  are  fixed  and  blood-
shot, the  breathing  is  heavy;  there  is  no  unusual  discharge  of  saliva.  In
epilepsy  the  dog  is  seen  to  tremble  just  as  the  fit  is  coming  on.  If  the  dog
tries  to  move  he  falls  on  one  side,  his  jaws  begin  to  champ  violently,  all
voluntary  muscles  are  powerfully  convulsed;  generally  he  utters  sharp,  short
cries,  but  not  always;  there  is  a  copious  discharge  of  white,  frothy  saliva,
the  gums  are  of  a  pale  leaden  hue.  When  recovering  from  an  epileptic  fit
the  dog  has  a  bewildered  look,  the  eyes  having  a  dull  and  stupid  expression."
So  great  is  the  popular  dread  of  hydrophobia  that  a  slight  derange-
ment of  the  dog's  nervous  system  is  often  mistaken  for  symptoms  of  rabies,
while  a  dog  in  convulsions,  in  an  epileptic  fit,  or  stricken  with  apoplexy
may  be  shot  as  mad — particularly  if  it  be  hot  weather — before  there  is  a
chance  of  determining  the  nature  of  his  disease.  The  principal  centers
of  the  nervous  system  are  the  brain  and  the  spinal  cord.  These  Stonehenge
compares  to  the  electric  telegraph.  The  brain  he  calls  the  central  office.
From  that  station  are  issued  messages  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  and  the
wires  which  carry  those  messages  are  the  nerves  of  motion,  the  nerves  of
sensation  and  the  nerves  of  organic  life,  all  of  which  have  their  separate*
ganglia,   or  the  lesser  station  masters.
The  normal,  movements  of  the  body  are,  says  a  writer  in  Our  Animal
Friends,  the  result  of  harmonious,  co-ordinated  functional  activity  of  the
neuro-muscular  mechanism,  i.  e.,  of  the  nerve  centers,  nerves  and  muscles.
In  convulsions  the  movements  are  purposeless  and  irregular,  and  are,  of
course,  wasteful  of  the  animal  energies.  A  dog  may  have  a  fit  from  over-
exertion in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  from  neuralgic  pains  or  from  toothache,  from
meningitis,  excessive  fright,  parasites  in  the  nose  or  brain,  acute  ear  dis-
ease, or  from  the  distress  of  being  lost  in  a  large  city;  or,,  if  a  female,  of
being  deprived  of  her  whelps.  Recently  it  has  been  shown  that  mental
distress  has  the  power  to  give  a  dog  diabetes.  It  stands  to  reason  that  so
sensitive  an  animal  should  never  be  unduly  excited.
On  no  account  allow  one  dog  to  see  another  in  a  fit.  The  suffering  dog
should  have  his  head  wet  and  should  be  kept  for  a  time  in  a  dark,  quiet
place,  free  from  all  excitement.  In  most  cases  of  convulsions  a  small  dose
of  bromide  of  potassium  will  do  great  good.  Hydrophobia,  considered  as
a  canine  disease  ,is  decidely  a  misnomer.  The  proper  term  for  canine
madness  is  rabies.  The  rabid  dog  has  "no  fear  of  water."  On  the  con-
trary, he  craves  it,  and,  unless  paralyzed,  he  has  no  difficulty  In  swallowing
it.  Rabies  is  a  specific  disease  of  the  nervous  system.  In  all  cases  there
is  an  intense  inflammation  of  the  brain  and  spinal  marrow,  ending  in  a
loss  of  function,  which  is  a  result  common  to  inflamed  glands.  The  mucous
glands  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  the  liver,  the  pancreas  and  the  kidneys
are  all  more  or  less  injected  with  blood;  but  the  salivary  glands  are
especially  affected,  and  the  secretion  of  saliva  is  greatly  increased.  There
is  the  furious  or  maniacal  form  of  rabies  and  the  paralytic.  The  paralytic
is  known  as  dumb  rabies.  Absolutely  typical  cases  of  either  form  are  as
rare  as  is  the  disease.  Death,  however,  usually  results  in  from  two  to  ten
days  in  the  furious  form,  while  in  dumb  rabies  the  period  is  much
shorter.
The  howl  or  bark  of  a  mad  dog  is  very  remarkable.  It  is  totally  unlike
his  ordinary  voice,  and  is  sonorous  and  melancholy  to  an  extreme.  No  one
need  mistake  it.  The  dog's  appetite  is  so  perverted  that  he  will  swallow
stones,  sticks,  straws  and  almost  any  filth.  His  biting  and  snapping  are
reflex  actions;  that  should  not  be  regarded  as  deliberate.  It  is  then  that
he  is  really  dangerous.  Irritability  is  an  advance  stage  of  rabies.  In  the
earlier  stages  the  animal  is  sullen  and  inclined  to  hide  away  in  corners.
His  eyes  grow  wild  and  suspicious.  If  at  large  he  will  roam  over  wide
tracts  of  country  at  a  jog  trot,  with  his  head  down  and  his  tongue  out.
In  dumb  rabies  there  is  an  entire  absence  of  excitement.  The  muscles  of
mastication  are  paralyzed  so  that  the  lower  jaw  is  dropped!  there  is  no
maniacal  stage  at  all.
Epileptical  convulsions  are  due  to  an  irregular  discharge  of  the  nerve
cells.  They  occur  unexpectedly,  are  of  variable  duration,  and  the  spasms
are  of  two  kinds.  A  prolonged  muscular  contraction  is  called  a  tonic  spasm.
Following  the  tonic  spasm  are  the  clonic  spasm,  which  consist  of  alternate
contraction  and  relaxation.  The  dog,  like  the  human  subject,  will  froth
at  the  mouth  and  bite  the  tongue.  Epilepsy  may  be  hereditary,  or  may
be  due  to  teething  and  worms.
Apoplexy  differs  greatly  from  epilepsy.  The  convulsions  are  not
prominent;  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  are  either  contracted  or  dilated;  there
is  long-continued  unconsciousness  and  more  or  less  paralysis.
Meningitis,  so  often  mistaken  for  rabies,  is  yet  very  different.  The
temperature  is  very  much  elevated,  which  it  is  not  in  rabies;  the  dog  snaps,
but  shows  no  tendency  to  bite,  and  there  is  no  particular  bark  and  howl
combined,  although  the  dog's  voice  is  high-pitched.
Phrentitis  is  simply  inflammation  of  the  brain.  It  is  sometimes  a  com-
plication of  distempers,  and  is  the  only  disorder  which  resembles  rabies.
It  generally  occurs  in  the  hottest  weather.  The  dog  can  not  propagate
phrentitis  by  salivary  inocculation.
"Hydrophobia  in  human  beings,"  says  a  writer,  "results  from  accidents
of  a  nervous  order,  sometimes  mortal,  sometimes  curable,  according  as
they  derive  from  disorders  analogous  to  tentanus  (lockjaw)  produced  by
a  wound  or  from  purely  mental  disorders."  According  to  Dr.  Caffe,
"Spontaneous  rabiform  hydrophobia  is  the  only  rabies  that  exists,  and  that
is  a  mortal  rabies."  Before  M.  Pasteur's  system  was  invented  about  nine-
teen persons  annually  were  officially  reported  to  have  died  of  hydropho-
bia. Now,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  number  of  persons  who  annually  re-
port themselves  bitten  by  rabid  dogs  averages  from  1,500  to  2,000.  Rabies
is  a  rare  disease,  rarer  today  than  in  the  past,  and  hydrophobia  is  more
or  less  a  form  of  hysteria.  Were  there  less  talk  about  it,  it  would  be  bet-
ter for  the  community.  A  little  more  knowledge  of  our  own  nervous  sys-
tem, a  little  less  ignorance  of  the  dog's,  and  we  shall  be  far  more  likely
to  escape  hydrophob  a  entirely  than  to  die  from  it  or  to  be  saved  by  inocu-
lation.
I  will  now  give  a  most  important  and  valuable  interview  with  the
famous  medical  expert,  Prof.  Edward  C.  Spitzka,  of  New  York.  Prof.
Spitzka  declares  the  Pasteur  rabies  theory  and  treatment  a  humbug  from
start  to  finish,  and  rabies  to  be  a  hoax.  Ex-United  States  Surgeon  General
Dr.  Wm.  A.  Hammond  indorses  his  decision.  Such  arguments  as  Prof.
Spitzka's,  a  most  eminent  authority,  should  convince  every  one  who  reads
it   that  he  is  correct:
"Although  Pasteur  was  undoubtedly  as  sincere  in  his  work  as  his
follower,  Paul  Gibier,  doubtless  is  in  dispensing  the  ridiculous  treatment,"
said  Prof.  Spitzka,  "I  am  willing  to  stake  my  reputation  that  there  is  no
such  disease  as  'hydrophobia,'  or  'rabies,'  in  existence,  and  I  am  further
impressed  that  the  Pasteur  inoculations  are  injurious.  This  is  not  merely
my  opinion.  I  have  a  practical  explanation  for  every  statement  I  make,
and  have  carefully  weighed  every  possible  opposition  to  my  conclusions
for  a  parallel  consideration.
"I  am  accordingly  prepared  to  answer  any  criticism.  Of  course,  the
strongest  retaliation  I  shall  receive  will  be  the  broad  charge  that  I  am
following  in  the  footsteps  of  the  narrow-minded  opposers  of.  the  Wonderful
.Tenner  smallpox  vaccination  cPscovery,  on  which  the  Pasteur  treatment
hinges  its  practicability.  As  to  this  most  enrnent  charge  there  is  no  con-
nection between  the  two  treatments.  For  while  every  one  acknowledges
the  existence  of  the  dreadful  smallpox,  the  existence  of  hydrophobia,  or  ra-
bies, has  never  been  satisfactorily  demonstrated.  I  have  not  myself — nor  has
any  other  expert  investigator — been  able  to  distinctly  diagnose  a  single
case  of  the  so-called  malady,  to  my  knowledge.  I  have  often  witnessed
the  symptoms,  commonly  termed  'rabies,'  but  in  every  instance  these  ex-
citing observations  have  been  plainly  nothing  more  than  tetanus  symptoms
of  acute  fevers  and   the  many  forms   of   deadly   blood   poisoning.
"The  water  theory  is  too  absurd  and  ridiculous  to  have  any  significance.
There  is  not  an  authority  to  be  found  for  its  assumption.  It  is  yet  to  be
explained  how  water  could  possibly  have  such  an  effect,  while  all  the
knowledge  modern  science  has  amassed  goes  to  provide  the  belief  merely  an
antiquated  superstition,  to  which  some  people  still  cling.
"When  Pasteur's  boom  was  exploded,  and  the  public  went  wild  with  en-
thusiasm over  it,  along  with  the  great  majority  of  scientific  men,  I  was
also  taken  in  by  the  contagion.  At  the  time  I  was  impressed  that  with
the  increasing  knowledge  gained  in  the  field  of  contagious  and  epidemic
diseases  generally,  much  substantial  advance  has  not  been  recorded  in
the  history  of  the  mysterious  rabies,  but  realizing  that  this  was  not  due
to  neglect  of  the  subject,  I  was  not  surprised  at  the  birth  of  the  Pasteur
theory.
"Owing  to  the  terrible  nature  of  the  symptoms  attributed  to  this
unfounded  malady,  an  attractive  field  of  research  has  been  open  to  those
animated  by  an  earnest  desire  to  prevent  and  relieve  human  sufferings
from  the  time  of  the  earliest  civilization.  The  symptoms  are  described  in
the  works  of  Horace,  Aristotle,  Virgil  and  Plutarch,  in  a  manner  which
Allows   that    while   the    world    has   advanced    in    all    other    lines    of    medical
science  it  is  pitifully  behind  the  date  in  clinging  to  this  relic  of  the  queer
superstition  of  ancient  times.
"Pasteur  was  fascinated — or  shall  I  say  hypnotized? — by  the  sensa-
tionalism and  mystery  of  the  belief.  It  is  most  likely  due  to  the  latter
element  that  the  universe  has  not  become  emancipated  from  such  super-
stitions as  are  involved  in  the  'rabies'  or  hydrophobia  hoax,  which  really
belong  to  medieval  history.
"Take  a  practical,  up-to-date  view  of  the  matter.  All  epidemic  dis-
orders should  be  accompanied  with  evidences  approaching  in  exactitude,
at  least,  a  degree  of  mathematical  proof.  'Rabies'  has  not,  while  all  others
have.  The  symptoms  observed  during  life,  as  well  as  the  signs  found  in
the  dead  body,  in  such  diseases  as  smallpox,  typhus  fever  and  cholera,  for
instance,  are  characteristic,  decisive  and  constant.  The  symptoms  in  'rabies'
in  man  are  extremely  vague,  conflicting  and  ,  inconsistent,  and,  further-
more, post-mortem  study  in  man,  as  well  as  in  canine,  has  yielded  no  re-
sult of  other  than  negative  value.
"Much  of  the  observation  made  of  queer-acting  dogs  is  made  through
optics  disturbed  by  fear,  and  by  persons  who  are  incompetent  to  judge
what  they  see,  consequently  if  a  canine  froth  at  the  mouth,  run  with  his
tongue  out  and  carry  his  tail  drawn  under  his  body  he  has  the  rabies,  and
the  revolver  or  policeman's  polished  baton  is  uncermoniously  called  into
service.
"What  nonsense!  Such  signs  have  been  observed  in  dogs  that  have
merely  been  chased  or  beaten,  or  that  are  afflicted  with  ordinary  canine
diseases.  What  if  they  are  taken  to  a  water  trough  and  go  into  convulsions
when  they  see  the  liquid.  They  are  overheated  and  at  a  high  tension
of  nervous  excitement.  Accordingly  they  conceive  a  craving  for  water,  yet
in  such  a  state  they  are  unable  to  compose  themselves  sufficiently  to  par-
take of  it,  and  so  the  unquenchable  craving  throws  them  into  the  dread-
ful paroxysms  which  decides  their  fate.
"The  same  explanation  serves  for  the  supposed  sufferers  of  rabies  in
man.  Any  human  being  suspected  to  be  infected  with  rabies  who  is  men-
tally weak  enough  to  work  up  a  like  nervous  excitement  to  that  I  have
j-ust  cited  in  the  canine  will  suffer  parallel  symptoms;  the  others  bitten
by  so-called  rabid  mad  dogs  will  suffer  no  ill  effects  unless  it  be  from
blood  poisoning,  infected  by  decayed  teeth  in  the  animal's  mouth.  In  the
latter  case  the  water  symptoms  do  not  present  themselves  if  the  afflicted
are  strong  enough  in  mind  to  keep  control  of  their  nervous  systems.
"I  believe  that  many  of  the  sufferers  who  develop  the  imaginary  dis-
eases were  bitten  by  animals  suffering  not  from  rabies,  but  from  epilepsy
or  from  gastro  intestinal  disease;  nay,  even  by  healthy  dogs.  The  serious-
ness and  oft-times  fatal  influence  of  terror  and  expectant  attention,  fos-
tered by  the  excitement  of  popular  alarm  is  equally  attested  by  other
epidemics  of  imitative  nervous  disorder,  and  is  a  familiar  fact  to  those
who  have  carefully  and  scientifically  studied  the  possible  influences  of
mind  on  the  body.
"From  as  far  back  as  the  fifteenth  century,  when  the  Alsatian  pheas-
ants imagined  they  were  changed  to  wolves,  ran  on  all  fours,  howling
demonically  and  tearing  children  to  pieces,  and  insisting  that  their  limbs
be  lopped  off  in  order  to  convince  others  that  the  wolfish  fur  grew
inward  from  their  skins,  to  the  present  day  when  those  dreading  hydro-
phobia bark  and  snarl  like  dogs,  mew  and  spit  like  cats  and  are  thrown
into  convulsions  at  sight  of  water,  the  records  of  the  disorder  are  replete
to  overflowing  with  delusion,  superstition,  hysteria  and  unconscious  simu-
lation.
"The  tragi-comical  case  of  a  number  of  persons  dying  in  the  sixteenth
century,  after  having  eaten  of  a  pig  that  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog,  which
in  turn  had  been  bitten  by  another  and  believed  to  be  a  rabid  one,  found
its  counterpart  a  short  time  ago  in  Russia,  where  a  medical  editor  and  a
prominent  follower  of  Pasteur  suggested  the  treating  of  a  number  of  per-
sons in  the  Pasteur  Institute  at  Odessa  for  no  better  reason  than  that
they  had  partaken  of  milk  from  a  cow  bitten  by  a  suspicious  acting  dog.
"In  order  to  determine  how  great  the  danger  from  'rabies'  was  in
the  United  States  about  ten  years  ago,  when  Pasteurism  was  popularized
in  the  country,  I  carefully  followed  up  all  the  newspaper  and  medical  jour-
nal reports  of  alleged  outbreaks  of  the  malady,  and  in  not  a  single  case
was  satisfactory  evidence  of  its  existence  obtained.  The  reported  outbreaks
were  mostly  located  in  or  near  two  centers,  Newark  and  Chicago.  In  the
epidemic  at  Niles  Centre,  seven  miles  from  Chicago,  which  led  to  a  wild
hunt  and  slaughter  of  the  innocent  canines  in  that  village,  the  human
subjects  were  successfully  cured  by  the  'madstone' — a  harmless  species  of
the  'faith  cure'  in  this  case.  But  the  subsidence  of  the  panic  was  mostly
due  to  a  sensible  physician  who  declined  to  .make  a  premature  diagnosis.
"At  Newark,  scientific  tests  were  made,  which  showed  that  neither
the  persons  dying  of  alleged  'rabies,'  the  dogs  that  had  bitten  them,  nor  the
children  reputed  to  have  been  saved  by  the  Pasteur  treatment,  had  been
afflicted  with  any  such  disease.
"Prof.  Briggs,  of  the  Carnegie  Laboratory,  and  Law,  of  Cornell,  inoc-
culated  dogs  with  material  from  the  deceased  pound-keeper,  Neall,  as  I
did   from  the  deceased   Hertlin,  and   in   every  case  with  negative  results.
"The  veterinarian,  Runge,  kept  the  clogs  bitten  by  the  suspected  animal
in  .quarantine  for  four  months  and  then  discharged  them  as  not  'rabid.'
Some  children  bitten  by  the  same  dog  and  not  treated  by  Pasteur  are  today
known  to  me.  They  are  as  free  from  disease  as  those  who  were  sub-
jected to  the  treatment.
"Scores  of  observations  might  be  added  in  bringing  the  review  up  to
date,  all  of  which  tend  to  show  that  the  cases  reported,  including  the  eight
Baltimore  victims,  were  not  sufferers  of  any  trumped-up  malady  as  'rabies.'
From  what  I  have  learned  of  those  of  the  latter  who  died  after  receiving
the  Pasteur  treatment,  I  should  say  they  were  poisoned,  either  by  the
inoculations  or  by  ptomaines  from  decayed  teeth  of  the  suspicious  canine
that  bit  them.  Of  the  others  who  are  believed  to'  have  been  saved  from
the  dreadful  disease  by  Gibier's  hand,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  biting  them
the  animal  didn't  happen  to  get  any  of  the  poisonous  saliva  in  the  wound
or  that  their  systems  were  not  susceptible  to  the  dangers  of  the  Pasteur
inoculation.  Science  has  proved  that  what  is  harmless  to  some  persons
may  be  deadly  to  others.  The  followers  of  the  Pasteur  treatment,  how-
ever,  disregard   this   established   fact.
"In  Pennsylvania  a  number  of  persons  were  needlessly  rendered  un-
happy by  a  sensational  report  to  the  effect  that  'rabies'  had  become  epi-
demic in  one  of  the  State's  prosperous  villages.  A  large  number  of  school
children  and  several  adults  had  been  infected  by  dog  bites.  After  several
of  the  children  and  two  of  the  adults  had  died,  the  dog — which  was  a  pet —
was  located.  The  animal  was  found  to  be  suffering  from  epileptic  fits,
induced  by  his  having  swallowed  a  chicken  bone.  The  deaths  caused  by
the  bites  were  undoubtedly  due  to  the  same  cause  as  I  have  explained  in
regard   to   the   Baltimore  victims.
"As  a  whole,  in  all  the  cases  reported  as  'lyssa,'  'rabies'  or  'hydropho-