Bronchitis  often  assumes  a  chronic  form,  especially  in  old  dogs,  when
the  cough  is  husky  and  constant,  retching  and  discharge  of  phlegm,  the
breathing  short  and  thick,  and  the  dog  is  incapable  of  much  exertion.
Chronic  cases  are  incurable,  but  alleviation  can  be  given  when  it  is  unusually
bad  by  giving  a  desertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful,  according  to  size  of  dog,
of  equal  parts  of  oxymel  of  squills  and  thick  mucilage  of  acacia  several
times  a   day.
Another  veterinarian  advises  as  follows:
"This  trouble  is  of  frequent  occurrence  and  is  due  to  an  inflammation
of  the  air  passage  leading  down  into  the  body  of  the  lung,  and  may  be  the
result  of  a  cold  or  chill  or  the  breathing  of  smoke  or  novious  vapors.  The
symptoms  are  more  or  less  difficulty  in  breathing,  severe  and  constant
coughing  and  the  accumulation  of  phlegm  in  the  windpipe.  In  bad  cases
the  patient  will  not  lie  down,  but  sits  with  the  forelegs  braced  and  the
chest  expanded.  In  treating  place  in  a  room  comfortably  warm  without
being  overheated,  and  moisten  the  air  by  keeping  a  kettle  going.  If  the
throat  is  so  full  of  phlegm  that  breathing  is  difficult  give  an  emetic  of  the
wine  of  ipecac  in  doses  of  a  half  to  two  teaspoonfuls,  repeated  in  one
hour,  if  necessary.  After  the  stomach  is  erupted  and  the  patient  has  quieted
use  the  following  mixture:  Paragoric  six  drams,  Hoffman's  spirits  two
drams,  ipecacuanha  wine  one  dram,  syrum  of  squills  one  ounce,  water  to
make  three  ounces.  The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  every
four  or  six  hours.  Keep  the  bowels  open  by  occasional  doses  of  aperient
medicine  and  repeat  the  emetic  if  the  breathing  has  not  improved  in  forty-
eight  hours,  and  after  the  acute  stage  of  the  disease  has  passed  and  the
cough  is  better  give  cod  liver  oil  emulsion.  Feed  on  milk,,  meat  broths  and
soup  during  the  early  stages  of  the  disease,  and  as  the  severe  symptoms
abate  meat  may  be  given.
Bronchitis    (Chronic   Husk) This   condition    is   the   result   of   a    more
or  less  chronic  thickening  of  the  membranes  lining  the  air  passages,  so  that
the  dog  is  in  apparent  good  health  with  the  exception  of  a  hard,  dry,  husky
cough  that  is  brought  on  by  any  excitement  or  exertion,  and  is  usually
worse  in  the  morning  and  at  night.     These  attacks  of  coughing  end  usually
in  a  retching  and  gagging,  as  if  vomiting  or  expelling  a  piece  of  phlegm
from  the  throat.  Give  aperient  medicine  so  as  to  keep  the  bowels  open
and  use  the  following  mixture:  Tincture  of  nux  vomica  thirty  drops,  syrup
of  squills  one  ounce,  water  to  make  three  ounces;  dose  from  half  a  tea-
spoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  three  times  a  day  after  feeding,  the  first  for
a  toy,  the  second  for  a  St.  Bernard  or  one  of  the  larger  breeds.  If  the
cough  is  very  severe  give  from  fifteen  drops  to  a  teaspoonful  of  glyco-
heroin  in  water.  Feed  underdone  meat,  raw  eggs,  gelatine  or  any  easily
digested  food  that  will  not  distend  the  stomach  unduly,  as  a  distension  of
the  stomach  brings  pressure  on  the  chest  and  aggravates  the  condition."
Bowels  (Intussusception). — This  trouble  is  of  more  frequent  occur-
rence in  puppies  than  old  dogs.  It  is  the  result  of  the  bowel  telescoping
upon  itself.  By  careful  manipulation  of  the  abdomen  it  can  be  located  by
a  long,  hard  swelling.  The  patient  suffers  much  pain  and  usually  whines
and  cries  pitifully.  The  other  symptoms  are  diarrhea,  with  blood-tinged
mucus,  and  in  the  early  stages  vomiting.  Intussusception  is  due  to  a  variety
of  causes,  such  as  worms,  indigestion  and  colic,  or  the  eating  of  hard
substances,  but  as  indigestion,  colic  and  the  abnormal  appetite  that  causes
dogs  to  eat  indigestible  and  irritating  matter  are  more  or  less  the  result
of  the  presence  of  worms,  the  latter  must  be  accepted  as  the  primary
cause.  The  importance  of  treating  for  them  frequently  is  therefore  ap-
parent. In  treating  mild  cases  that  have  not  progressed  far  give  from
one  to  five  drops  of  laudanum 'every  three  hours  in  a  teaspoonful  of  milk.
One  drop  is  the  correct  dose  for  a  puppy  two  to  three  months  old  of  the
toy  breeds  and  five  drops  is  the  dose  for  the  large  breeds  of  the  age  men-
tioned. Feed  only  liquid  food — milk  or  beef  tea.  If  there  is  not  a  decided
improvement  in  the  puppy's  condition  in  twenty-four  hours  an  operation
should  be  resorted  to.  In  the  early  stages  it  is  nearly  always  successful
and  the  puppy  receives  immediate  relief.  If  it  is  postponed  the  operation
is  more  difficult,  on  account  of  the  inflammation,  and  the  bowels  cannot
be  so  easily  straightened.  The  patient  should  fast  for  twenty-four  hours
following  the  operation,  after  which  for  a  few  days  administer  only  liquids.
Breasts  (Inflammation) . — This  painful  condition  usually  attacks  bitches
while  nursing  their  puppies,  the  abscesses  that  are  liable  to  form  at  other
times  being  generally  of  slower  growth  and  not  accompanied  by  systemic
disturbance.  The  milk  gland  in  acute  cases  is  swollen,  hard  and  red  and
very  painful,  and  the  elevation  of  temperature  indicates  the  formation  of
pus.  After  two  or  three  days  the  swelling  becomes  softer,  comes  to  a
point,  breaks  and  freely  discharges.  If  the  bitch  is  nursing  it  is  necessary
usually  to  remove  the  puppies  and  feed  them  by  hand  or  turn  them
over  to  a  foster-mother,  the  mother  meanwhile  being  milked  two  or  three
times  a  day.  The  swellings  should  be  poulticed  with  flaxseed  until  they
are  soft,  and  then  lanced.  As  a  rule  they  do  not  require  any  other  treat-
ment, for  their  dependent  position  insures  free  drainage.  It  is  advisable
to  keep  the  patient's  bowels  open  with  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine.
Biliousness. — Symptoms  are  vomiting  in  the  morning  of  frothy  yellow
bile,  usually  after  eating  grass,  an  unusual  thirst,  sometimes  a  diarrhoea,
refusal  of  food,  and  in  some  cases  the  eyes  and  mouth  and  skin  take  on
a  yellow  cast.  For  treatment  first  give  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  so  as  to  keep
the  bowels  open  and  remove  the  excess  of  bile.  If  there  is  much  nausea
and  sickness  of  the  stomach  give  carbonate  of  bismuth.  A  dose  of  from
two  to  twelve  grains  simply  should  be  placed  on  the  tongue  and  the  mouth
held  for  a  moment  until  it  is  swallowed.  If  this  does  not  give  good  results
use  the  following  prescription:  Diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  twenty  drops,
liquor  bismuth  one  ounce,  water  to  make  six  ounces.  The  dose  is  from
a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  every  three  hours.  In  most  of  these
cases  giving  the  stomach  a  complete  rest  will  do  more  good  than  anything
in  the  way  of  drugs.  In  some  cases  good  results  follow  the  use  of  small
doses  of  quinine  or  the  extract  of  taraxacum.
Bed    Sores Large,    unhealthy-looking    sores    frequently    form    on    the
hips,  points  of  the  buttocks,  shoulders  and  other  parts  of  dogs  which  have
suffered  from  severe  illness.  Success  in  treatment  depends  upon  protect-
ing the  parts  affected  from  further  injury.  First  clean  the  parts  with  a
warm,  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid,  then  dry  carefully  with  soft  linen
rags  and  dust  with  powdered  boracic  acid  and  iodoform  in  equal  parts;
encircle  the  injured  parts  with  a  ring  of  felt,  kept  in  position  with  adhesive
tape.
Bladder  (irritable). — These  cases  as  a  rule  require  the  attention  of
a  veterinary,  as  the  irritation  may  be  set  up  by  a  variety  of  causes,  not
the  least  of  which  is  a  stone  in  the  bladder.  The  common  symptom  of
bladder  trouble  is  constant  straining,  even  when  indoors;  in  other  cases,
not  so  bad,  there  is  frequent  micturition  of  high-colored,  cloudy,  strong-
smelling  urine.  The  presence  of  blood,  as  a  rule,  is  an  indication  of  calcu-
lus, or  stone.  Sometimes  the  blood  comes  mixed  with  the  urine,  and  in
other  cases  it  comes  in  drops  after  the  passing  of  water.  In  those  cases
where  the  stone  becomes  fixed  in  the  pasage,  and  the  dog  is  incapable  of
micturition,  no  time  should  be  lost  in  calling  in  a  good  veterinary  sur-
geon. If  there  is  not  much  pain  a  course  of  treatment  with  the  hyposul-
phite of  soda  is  all  that  is  necessary,  the  dose  being  from  three  to  twenty
grains,  diluted  in  water  and  administered  three  times  a  day  before  feeding.
If  there  is  much  pain,  give  the  tincture  of  hyoscyamus  in  dose  of  from
two  to  fifteen  drops  in  water  every  three  hours.  Feed  on  milk,  barley  wa-
ter and  dog  cakes.
Broken  Bones. — It  can  be  ascertained  that  a  bone  of  the  leg  is  broken
by  taking  hold  of  the  limb  above  the  supposed  fracture  and  moving  the
lower  portion  against  it,  when  a  grating  or  crackling  of  the  broken  ends
against  each  other  will  be  felt  or  heard.  The  treatment  consists  in  ad-
justing the  fractured  parts  to  their  natural  form,  and  applying  splints  to
keep  the  parts  set.  Splints  may  be  made  of  strips  of  gutta  percha,  softened
in  warm  water  and  moulded  to  fit  the  limb,  or  pieces  of  thin  wood  may  be
cut  the  required  size  and  well  padded  with  wadding.  The  splints  can  be
kept   in   place   by  binding   evenly  with   light   cotton   bandages,   which,   pre-
vious  to  application,  have  been  smeared  with  the  following  preparation
whilst  warm:  Take  Venice  turpentine,  Burgundy  pitch,  equal  parts;  melt
and  smear  over  the  bandage  whilst  hot.  If  much  swelling  occurs,  it  will
be  necessary  to  slacken  the  bandages,  and,  in  most  cases,  it  will  be  requisite
to  muzzle  the  dog  to  prevent  him  tearing  off  the  splints.  Perfect  rest  will
be  required,  and  the  general  health  attended  to.  The  time  it  will  take
for  the  bones  to  unite  is  uncertain,  but  always  tedious.
Unless  you  feel  capable  of  handling  the  case  properly  yourself  you  had
better  call  in  a  verterinarian  or  your  family  physician.  Your  druggist  could
do  this  in  case  neither  the  veterinarian  or  doctor  could  be  had.
Bowels,  Obstruction  of  the   (Constipation  or  Costiveness) — Dogs  kept
in  the  house  and  not  exercised  sufficiently,  or  improperly  fed,  are  particularly
liable  to  constipation.  Bones,  while  excellent  and  almost  necessary  to  a
dog's  health,  yet  an  excessive  use  of  them  is  to  be  avoided,  also  any  one
kind  of  dry  food,  and  no  dog  should  be  kept  constantly  on  one  kind  of  food,
as  want  of  exercise  and  the  absence  of  necessary  variety  in  the  food  are
the  principal  causes  of  constipation.
When  looked  upon  as  a  disease  itself,  or  as  a  symptom  and  attendant
on  other  diseases,  it  is  always  troublesome  and  often  becomes  dangerous.
The  feces  accumulate  and  get  pressed  into  hardened  lumps,  the  belly  is
distended  and  hard,  the  colic  pains  occur,  driving  the  dog  almost  frantic
and  causing  him  to  run  about  blindly,  stumbling  over  different  obstacles
in  this  way,  and  to  give  utterance  every  now  and  the  nto  sharp  howls  of
pain.  All  this  pain  and  misery  that  the  poor  dog  has  to  suffer  in  nearly
every  case,  is  the  result  of  neglect  of  proper  rules  which  every  dog  owner
should,  in  common  justice  to  the  dog,  be  acquainted  with  and  observe.  But
the  evil  does  not  end  here,  for  it  is  the  too  common  practice  to  rush  into
one  of  commission  quite  as  great  or  greater — namely,  the  common  practice
in  constipation  of  resorting  to  strong  purgatives,  such  as  epsom  salts,  jalop,
calomel,  etc.,  the  consequence  of  giving  which  is  to  render  the  evil  worse
by  forcing  the  feces  into  still  less  compass  when  it  becomes  more  impacked
and  hardened  than  before.  The  proper  course  to  follow  is,  when  the  dog
is  in  great  pain,  administer  a  dose  of  the  anti-spasmodic  drops.  Compound
spirits  of  sulphuric  ether  and  tincture  of  opium  (laudanum)  equal  parts.
Mix  and  keep  in  a  well-stoppered  bottle  in  a  cool  place.  The  dose  for  a
20-lb.  to  30-lb.  dog  would  be  a  small  teaspoonful  given  in  about  two
tablespoonfuls  of  milk,  gruel  or  other  liquid.  Success  in  relieving  the  pa-
tient is  best  obtained  by  mechanical  means.  Clysters  of  thin  oatmeal  gruel
or  soap  and  water,  lukewarm,  and  containing  about  one  ounce  of  castor
oil  in  each  half  pint,  must  be  used  continuously  for  some  time,  in  fact  till
the  desired  object  has  been  attained.  This  end  will  be  greatly  facili-
tated by  first  introducing  the  finger,  oiled,  into  the  rectum,  and  removing  as
much  of  the  hard  lumps  of  feces  as  can  be  reached.  Assistance  will  also
be  given  to  the  action  of  the  clysters  by  gently  pressing  or  kneading  the
belly  at  intervals  with  the  hand.  It  is  necessary  that  everything  should
be  done  with  the  greatest  gentleness;  boisterous  conduct  and  rough  hand-
ling being  likely  to  alarm   the  patient  and   cause  him   to   do   himself  irre-
parable    injury-      When    the    lower    bowels    have    been    emptied    follow    it
up  by  giving  the  dog  a  strong  dose  of  Podophyllin  pills:
Podolphylln     6  grains
Compound  extract  of  colocynth    30  grains
Powdered    rhubarb    48  grains
Extract  of  henbane 36  grains
Mix  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills.  The  dose  is  from  one-half  to
two  pills,  according  to  age  and  size,  and  it  is  advisable  to  give  the  dog  a  little
warm  broth  after  the  pill  to  assist  in  its  action.
The  use  of  purgatives  must  not  be  resorted  to,  to  prevent  a  recurrence
of  the  disease.  The  system  of  management  must  be  altered,  the  dog  must
have  daily  exercise,  the  food  must  be  varied  and  embrace  a  portion  of
boiled  green  vegetables  at  least  every  second  or  third  day.  For  a  week
or  so  after  the  attack  rather  sloppy  food  should  be  given,  such  as  welf-
boiled  porridge  and  milk,  or  broth,  and  an  occasional  meal  of  boiled  liver
will  act  as  a  gentle  laxative.
Worms  are  another  cause  of  obstruction  in  the  intestines,  especially  in
puppies;  round  worms  get  coiled  into  balls,  set  up  local  irritation  and
interfere  with  the  natural  action  of  the  bowels.
BLACK  TONGUE.  —
This  is  a  new  disease,  confined  so  far,  to  dogs  in  the  Southern  states.
Personally,  I  have  never  seen  a  case  of  it,  and  do  not  pretend  to  try  to  ad-
vise as  to  treatment.  The  following  was  written  by  the  late  Polk  Miller
of  Richmond,  Va.,  (and  a  valued  friend  of  mine  he  was),  and  I  am  giving
his  article  and  treatment,  due  to  the  great  confidence  I  felt  in  him  as  a
gentleman  sportsman,  and  lover  of  dogs.
BLACK  TONGUE   OR  THE   "NEW  DISEASE."  —
There  is  a  new  disease  among  the  dogs  in  our  Southern  States,  and  in
some  of  the  Northern  and  Western  States  (though  to  a  limited  extent),
which  is  giving  great  trouble  and  anxiety  among  dog-owners.  I  say  new,
because  it  has  appeared  in  the  last  ten  years.  It  is  called  "Black  Tongue"
by  the  majority  of  people,  but  as  that  does  not  appear  in  all  cases,  it  is
called  the  "New  Disease."  A  dog  which  is  perfectly  well  today  may  be
extremely  ill  tomorrow,  'and  if  the  disease  is  not  arrested  in  twenty-four  to
thirty-six  hours,  it  generally  proves  fatal.  A  close  watch  should  be  kept  to
see  that  it  doesn't  get  too  good  a  start.  The  symptoms,  as  nearly  as  I
can  describe  them,  are  as  follows:  General  languor,  dullness  about  the
eyes,  little  or  no  appetite,  a  dryness  about  the  mouth  and  throat  (some-
times swelling),  and  high  fever.  In  some  cases  the  glands  are  excited
and  a  profuse  flow  of  saliva  is  noticed,  but  in  most  cases  the  tongue  is
dry,  and  the  poor  brute  seems  anxious,  though  unable,  to  swallow  water,
on  account  of  inability  to  lap  the  liquid.  These  are  some  of  the  most
noticeable    symptoms,    and    the    dog    thus    affected    is    indisposed    to    notice
the  call  or  caresses  of  his  master,  and  manifests  a  disposition  to  roam
about  in  a  listles  manner,  preferring  to  be  "severely  left  alone."  What-
ever may  be  the  opinion  of  others  as  to  a  proper  treatment,  or  a  name  for
this  disease,  it  is  my  belief,  from  personal  experience  with  it,  that  it
should  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  our  old  physicians  treated  diph-
theria in  human  beings  before  the  new  remedy — anti-toxin — was  discov-
ered. I  give  that,  and  trust  that  the  lives  of  many  dogs  that  would  other-
wise die  may  be  saved.  I  have  never  failed  to  cure  a  dog  by  the  prompt  use
of  this  treatment  at  the  very  first  appearance  of  the  trouble,  and  I  have
never  known  one  to  get  well  when  two  days  have  elapsed  before  the  rem-
edy  was   applied:
Chlorate  of  Potassium V2    ounce
Mur.   Tine.   Iron    Vz    ounce
Water     1   pint
Sig. — Mix,  shake,  and  with  a  soft  rag  protruding  over  the  end  of  a
stick,  dip  into  the  solution  and  thoroughly  mop  out  the  mouth  and  throat
twice    daily,    for   two    days.
The  following  was  written  by  someone  south,  who  seemed  to  know
from  experience  as  to  Black  Tongue.  The  3  grain  dose  given  of  thymol,  was
used  on  a  Foxhound,  probably  a  fifty  pound  dog,  therefore  exercise  judg-
ment, (as  thymol  is  a  dangerous  drug),  for  smaller  dogs:
"As  to  black  tongue,  I  use  the  thymol,  as  it  is  a  better,  antiseptic
for  the  intestinal  tract,  and,  in  addition  to  this  I  use  alternately  a  wash  of
permanganate  of  potash  and  a  saturated  watery  solution  of  alum.  I  give
the  thymal  rubbed  up  with  pure  Castile  soap  and  put  into  capsules,  giving
one  capsule  containing  three  grains  of  thymol  every  four  hours.  I  wash  the
mouth  out  before  each  capsule  is  given,  alternating  with  the  two  solutions
mentioned   above.
As  the  dog  sick  with  black  tongue  will  not  eat,  as  a  rule,  I  drench
him  with  milk  morning  and  night,  sometimes  adding  a  raw  egg  to  the
milk.
I  want  to  give  just  a  few  warnings  to  those  unfamiliar  with  the  use
of  thymol.  Its  use  in  the  human  being  is  attended  with  a  certain  amount  of
danger,  and  this  is  doubly  so  in  the  dog.  It  should  never  be  given  to  a
dog  until  the  intestinal  tract  has  been  thoroughly  cleaned  out  with  salts.
The  dog  should,  then  be  starved  for  at  least  twelve  hours  before  the  thy-
mol is  administered,  and  this  should  be  followed  in  six  hours  with  another
dose  of  salts.  The  dog  should  then  be  given  nothing  to  eat  for  several
hours  more.  Under  no  circumstances  should  the  dog  be  allowed  any
fat  for  several  hours  after  the  last  dose  of  salts  and  he  should  have
nothing  whatever  to  eat  between  the  first  and  last  dose  of  salts.
Several  fatal  cases  of  poisoning  are  on  record  from  the  use  of  thymol
in  the  treatment  of  hookworm  in  the  human.  Chenopodium,  or  the  oil  of
wormseed,  is  a  far  safer  drug  to  use.  In  addition  to  its  being  a  safer
drug,  it  has  been  proven  that  it  effects  cures  of  hookworm  in  the  human
where  thymol  has  been  given  and  has  failed.  In  the  Journal  of  the  Amer-
ican   Medical    Association    of .  November    28,    1914,    Dr.    Robert    L.    Levy    of
Johns  Hopkins  Hospital  reports  two  cases  of  hookworm  treated  and  cured
with  oil  of  wormseed  where  thymol  had  failed.  He  also  gives  the  'coeffi-
cient of  efficacy'  in  the  same  percentage  as  the  article  you  have  quoted.
He  gives  the  following  mode  of  administration:  First  day— Liquid  diet;
8  p.  m.  one  ounce  Epsom  salts.  Second  day — Omit  .breakfast  and  lunch;
at  5  a.  m.  one  ounce  of  Epsom  salts;  at  7,  9  and  11,  sixteen  drops  of  oil
chenopodium  on  a  little  granulated  sugar;  1  p.  m.  one  ounce  castor  oil
containing  fifty  minims  of  chloroform;  soft  supper  (this  for  a  dog  would
be  a  little  baker's  bread  soaked  in   milk).      Third  day — Resume  full  diet."
Another  southern   writer  has   this  to  say:
"While  it  has  not  been  definitely  determined  whether  or  not  this  dis-
ease is  due  to  hookworm  infestment,  indications  suggest  a  very  close  relation,
as  postmortem  examinations  have  shown  hookworms  and  great  intestinal
inflammation.  Ii  is  probable  that  the  toxin  which  the  hookworm  injects
into  the  dog's  blood  may  cause  the  disease.  It  is  not  contagious,  nor
can  it  be  communicated  by  feeding  or  drinking  from  the  same  vessel.  An
experiment  was  recently  made  by  feeding  parts  of  stomach  and  intestines
of  a  dog  which  died  of  an  acute  case  of  black  tongue  to  several  healthy
dogs,  and  no  ill  effects  developed.  Another  fact  that  is  quite  apparent  is
that  black  tongue  is  never  found  except  in  sections  of  the  country,  which
includes  the  entire  South,  where  the  hookworm  is  known  to  exist"  As  to
the  treatment  for  hookworms,  see  "Hookworms"  in  the  regular  worm
article.
Colic. — This  subject  is  very  completely  covered  by  Dalziel.
"Nearly  all  domestic  animals  are  subject  to  attacks  of  colic,  or  pripes,
as  it  is  more  frequently  termed,  especially  when  the  horse  is  the  subject
of  the  disease.  In  the  dog,  puppies  are  especially  liable  to  it,  but  it  attacks
dogs  of  all  ages,  and,  if  not  promptly  attended  to  and  properly  treated,  is
very  liable  to  end  in  inflammation  of  the  bowels — a  most  dangerous  dis-
ease, which,  in  some*  of  its  features,  though  happily  not  its  dangerous  ones,
colic  resembles.  One  very  important  point  of  distinction  is,  that  whereas
inflammation  comes  on  gradually,  and  feverishness,  with  hot,  dry  nose,  etc.,
always  exist  as  premonitory  symptoms,  colic  comes  on  suddenly,  and  a  dog
eating  well  and  seeming  in  perfect  health  is  seized  with  spasm  of  the
coat  of  the  bowels,  causing  such  pain  that  he  gives  voice  to  a  low  moan,
which  is  afterward  changed  to  a  prolonged  howl,  as  the  paroxysms  of  pain
increase  in  frequency  and  severity.  In  colic,  too,  the  nose  and  mouth  are
cool,  and  there  is  no  offensive  breath.  As  in  inflammation,  the  attitude