cated  by  crying  out  and  biting  at  the  ribs  over  tiie  seat  of  heart;  very
rapid  breathing.
Abdomen.-f-Swollen  and   hard   to   the   touch;    griping  pains,   indicated
by  rolling  about;  lying  on  stomach  with  outstretched  legs;  flatulenc*;
voniition.
Anus. — Considerable  local  irritation,  indicated  by  dragging  along  on
the  hindquarters;  protrusion  of  the  mucous  membrane  and  prolapse  of  the
parts.
Skin. — Coat  rough,  stands  on  end;  abundant  scurf;  herpetic  eruptions;
thick  and  lacking  usual  pliability.
Foeces. — Constipated,  with  frequent  ineffective  efforts  to  pass;  coated
with  slimy  mucus;  or  loose,  papescent,  mixed  with  slimy  mucus;  great
straining;  dark  colored,  sometimes  bloody,  and  very  offensive;  discharges
of  slimy  mucus  only  are  frequently  observable;  at  such  times  evacuations
are  white  or  greenish,  attended  with  much  straining.
Urine, — Passed  with  difficulty;  pale  or  milky  appearance;  or  whit*
and  thick,  passed  involuntarily.
Nervous  System. — Convulsions,  cramps,  paralysis,  giddiness,  irritabil-
ity, sleeplessness,  depression,  restlessness;  suddenly  jumps  up  out  of  sleep,
whines  and  cries  out  a  with  fear;  epilepy;  chorea.
The  presence  of  worms  naturally  tends  to  reduce  a  dog  in  condition,
and  many  dogs  remain  permanently  so  until  a  thorpugh  dosing  is  given
them,  which  is  effective  in  ridding  them  of  the  nuisance."
As  to  worms,  it  is  never  necessary  to  consult  a  veterinarian,  in  fact,
safer  not  to  do  so,  as  too  many  of  them  prescribe  and  use  medicines  that
are  dangerous,  have  to  be  given  too  often,  and  in  too  large  quantities.  In
case  you  are  where  you  cannot  get  the  vermifuges  I  have  mentioned,  and
cannot  wait  till  you  could  get  them,  then  here  is  a  prescription  for  worms:
Oil  of  male  shield  fern    1   dram
Santonine    8   grains
Fluid   extract  of  jalap    1   ounce
Olive    oil     1   ounce
Oil  of  anise    20   drops
"Dose  for  puppies  two  to  four  months  old,  one  and  a  half  teaspoons-
ful;  seven  to  ten  months  old,  two;  and  grown  dogs,  two  and  a  half
or  three  teaspoonfuls,  given  on  an  empty  stomach.
r -
"Above  doses  are  for  dogs  that  weigh  when  grown  from  50  pounds
to  100  pounds.  For  smaller  dogs  weighing  about  25  pounds  take  two-
thirds,  and  toy  dogs  of  about  10  pounds  take  one-third  the  above  doses.
In  treating  puppies  with  this  remedy,  give  only  one  dose;  on  old  dogs,  re-
peat once  or  twice."
There  is  no  use  giving  any  worm  remedy  unless  the  dog  has  been
prepared  for  it  by  a  proper  fasting,  and  the  medicine  is  put  in  them  when
bowels  are  empty.  You  must  catch  the  worms  by  fishing  for  them  when
they  are  hungry,  the  exception  of  this  rule  being,  of  course,  in  the  case  of
treating  puppies  yet  unweaned.  This  is,  as  before  said,  not  so  often  ne-
cessary.
Dr.  Clayton  furnishes  me  directions  as  to  giving  his  Vermifuge  as
follows:  "The  dose  for  toy  dog  ten  days  old  is  two  to  five  drops,  twenty
days  old  fiv«  to  ten  drops,  thirty  days  old  ten  to  thirty  drops.     Medium  and
large  breeds,  twice  and  three  times  the  amount,  to  be  varied  by  the  size
and  strength  of  the  animal,  and  can  be  given  with  perfect  safety.  I  have
yet  to  see  one  unpleasant  result  of  the  Vermifuge,  and  I  will  pay  for  any
pup  that  has  been  properly  treated  with  my  Vermifuge  in  time,  that  dies
of  worms.  I  will  put  up  twice  the  value  of  the  pup,  and  after  I  have  given
a  dose  of  my  Vermifuge,  if  the  pup  dies  and  there  is  found  one  worm,  the
owner  takes  the  money;  if  there  are  no  worms,  the  owner  stands  the  loss.
I  absolutely  guarantee  to  remove  all  worms  with  my  remedies,  without
injury  to  the  animal,  and  you  cannot  speak  too  highly  of  my  worm  reme-
dies."
Dr.  Clayton  further  says:  "Puppies  never  do  so  well  as  when  get-
ting the  nourishment  from  the  mother,  and  if  it  is  possible  to  rid  them  of
worms  at  this  t'me  it  is  very  much  to  be  desired,  this  can  be  accomplished
by  giving  Clayton's  Vermifuge,  as  it  is  a  safe  remedy  and  can  be  given  to
puppies  at  ten  days'  old,  any  breed.  The  Vermifuge  should  never  be  given
oftener  than  once  a  week.  It  is  a  good  plan  to  give  all  puppies  the  Vermi-
fuge, say  once  a  week  from  ten  days  old  until  they  are  three  months  old,
as  you  are  then  absolutely  sure  your  puppies  are  free  from  worms,  and
barring  all  contagious  diseases  will  soon  arrive  at  the  teething  period."
Now,  what  I  have  written  and  furnished  you  in  the  foregoing  is  meant
for  Stomach  or  Round  Worms  espec'ally.  Any  of  these  Vermifuges  might
also  expel  tape  worm,  but  I  now  treat  of  it,  and  a  remedy  that  is  certain,
safe  and  sure,  one  made  and  intended  to  be  used  on  human's  for  tape
worm,  but  adapted  to  and  used  on  the  dog,  by  the  writer:
Tape  Worm — Symptoms  of  Tape  Worm. — An  irregular  and  frequently
a  ravenous  appetite  co-existing  with  considerable  emaciation,  the  food  taken
seeming  to  do  the  dog  no  good.  The  breath  is  offensive,  and  nose  hot  and
dry.  The  coat  has  a  rough,  harsh,  staring,  unhealthy  look,  the  hair  looking
dead.  I  have,  however,  found  tape  worms  in  a  pug  dog  that  had  a  sleek
and  glossy  coat  and  was  fat  and  healthy.  They  often  have  a  depraved  ap-
petite, looking  for  and  eating  filth.  Parts  of  the  worm  may  sometimes  be
seen  hanging  from  the  anus  of  the  dog,  this  being  the  case  in  the  pug  spoken
of,  and  who  had  never  shown  any  signs  of  having  such  trouble,  as  she  was
a  bitch  that  had  had  several  litters  of  pups.
I  prefer  mixing  it  in  molasses,  as  this  is  sweet  and  also  a  physic.  It
should  work  him  in  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour,  but  sometimes  takes
longer.
Another   way   to  give  it  is  by  mixing  the  powder  in   castor  or  olive  oil,
the  way  it  is  given  by  doctors  in  treating  human  beings  for  tape  worm.
Now,  arrange  to  have  it  so  you  can  examine  the  passages  by  dog  being
confined  in  a  yard.  Be  there  yourself  till  it  has  worked  the  dog,  don't  give
it  up  and  go  away,  for  this  catching  tape  worms  is  not  easy  fishing,  and  you
must  give  it  your  attention.  Examine  each  stool  and  carefully  pick  out
the  part  of  worm  it  may  contain,  wash  this  off  and  put  it  on  a  sheet  of
paper  so  you  can  examine  it  and  see  what  luck  you  had  in  that  haul,  or  if
you  got  the  head  that  time.  You  can  buy  at  a  small  cost  a  magnifying  glass,
as  the  head  cannot  be  seen  with  the  naked  eye.  As  soon  as  medicine  is
through  working,  feed  up  your  dog,  for  he  will  relish  a  good  meal.  If  you
find  the  head,  then  I  would  let  the  dog  go  for  a  week  before  you  give  him
another  dose,  but  if  you  have  not  found  the  head  then  repeat  dose  in  two
or  three  days.
In  tape  worm  cases  the  treatment  must  be  repeated  and  persevered
with  until  the  head  of  the  worm  is  expelled,  and  in  all  cases  the  worms  and
all  discharged  feces  should  be  either  burned  or  destroyed  by  mixing  it  with
some  powerful  disinfectant  and  then  buried,  to  prevent  propagation  of  the
parasites  by  their  ova.
You  may  get  one  worm  or  more,  and  yet  the  dog  may  have  more  tape
worms,  which  treat  for  later  on  if  symptoms  again  appear.  Here  is  another
prescription   which   is  recommended   by  Dalz'el:
Treatment  for  Tape  Worm. — I  will  now. divulge  the  secret  of  the  rem-
edy that  I  have  sold  for  years  under  the  name  of  "Eberhart's  Tape  Worm
Remedy,"  and  which  has  never  failed  and  never  will  fail  to  remove  tape
worms,  head  and  all,  if  directions  are  followed.  Kamala  is  the  article.  It
is  a  product  of  India,  a  fine  granular  powder  of  a  reddish,  brown  color,
obtained  from  the  minute  glands  adhering  to  the  capsules  of  Rottlera
tinctoria.
Some  ten  years  ago  my  pug  "Boycott"  was  afflicted  with  tape  worm,  not
only  one  but  several  (as  is  sometimes  the  case),  and  I  tried  every  known
remedy  and  each  case  failed  to  rid  him  of  the  worms,  besides  nearly  ruin-
ing the  dog.  I  paid  one  tape  worm  doctor  (who  treated  people)  ten  dollars
to  work  on  my  dog  one  entire  day,  and  lie  fa'ied  to  get  the  head  of  the
worm,  and  the  poor  dog  was  sick  for  many  days  afterward,  due  to  the
severe  ordeal  and  treatment.  I  then  discovered  "Kamala,"  which  had  been
used  for  human  beings,  and  in  less  than  a  week  I  had  removed  three  tape
worms    (including   heads)    aggregating    eighty    feet    in    length.
Kamala  is  entirely  harmless,  never  causing  irritation  or  inflammation,
and  unlike  other  remedies,  its  use  does  not  leave  the  patient  in  a  weakened
condition,  but  exactly  the  reverse  in  this  respect- — the  dog  feeling  better,
is  braced  up,  acts  happy  and  better  than  before  taking  it.  So  harmless  do
I  know  it  to  be,  that  many  times  I  have  given  it  as  an  ordinary  physic
when  I  did  not  have  castor  oil  on  hand.  It  is  the  greatest  tape  worm
remedy  ever  used  and  I  now  give  up  the  secret  purely  for  the  good  of  dogs,
as  I  have  sold  it  for  years  and  am  receiving  orders  for  it  almost  daily,
it  having  been  a  profitable  part  of  my  business.
It  is  also  a  very  good  remedy  for  removing  round  worms.  Being  a  com-
paratively new  remedy  at  this  writing,  not  all  druggists  keep  it,  and  espe-
cially in  smaller  towns,  and  if  your  druggist  has  not  got  it  send  to  me
and  I  can  mail  it  to  you,  as  my  druggist  in  Cincinnati  keeps  it  in  stock,
and  always  fresh,  which  is  highly  important,  as  it  must  be  fresh  and  kept
in  a  tightly  corked  bottle.  For  Fifty  Cents  I  can  send  it  by  mail — enough
usually  for  any  dog.  This  one  remedy  alone  is  worth  the  cost  of  a  good
many  copies  of  this  book.
Never  use  areca  nut,  the  relict  of  a  past  age,  which  has  for  so  long  a
time  been  used  for  tape  worm,  and  has  killed  more  dogs  than  it  ever  cured,
a  deadly  and  dangerous  remedy.
How  to  Use  Kamala.
Fast  your  dog  for  twenty-four  hours   (a  day  and  a  night)   and  then  in
the  morning  give  him  the  dose.  A  strong  and  mature  dog  should  be  kept
without  food  for  twenty-four  hours,  weakly  dogs  and  puppies,  a  less  period,
but  sufficient  to  empty  the  stomach,  for  it  is  no  use  giving  vermifuge  on  a
full  stomach,   except  to  young  puppies,  of  course.
Weigh  your  dog  and  if  he  is  ordinarily  strong  and  healthy,  the  size
dose  to  give  is  two  grains  for  each  pound  the  dog  weighs.  If  the  dog  is
not  in  usual  health  or  is  a  weakly  sort,  try  it  first — one  and  a  half  grains
to  each  pound.  Kamala  is  tasteless,  and  unless  the  dog  gets  the  idea  you
are  "giving  him  medicine"  it  is  easily  administered  as  follows:  I  give  it
mixed  in  molasses  and  then  put  it  in  his  mouth,  rubbing  whatever  is  left
on  your  finger,  on  his  nose  and  he  will  lick  it  off  himself.
In  using  Kamala,  should  you  give  an  overdose,  no  harm  will  result
from  it,  as  it  is  not  a  drug.  An  even  teaspoonful  of  Kamala  is  sixty  grains,
and  taking  this  as  a  guide,  you  can  come  near  enough  to  the  proper  dose
for  any  dog,  if  you  have  the  dog's  weight,  as  for  instance,  if  your  dog
weighed  sixty  pounds,  then  the  dose  would  be  two  teaspoonfuls,  and  you
can  get  at  it  this  way,  or  a  better  plan  is  to  get  your  druggist  to  weigh  it
out  into  proper  sized  doses,  telling  him  weight  of  dog  and  that  the  dose
is   two   grains   to   each  pound   dog   weighs.
You  may  find  difficulty  in  getting  Kamala,  many  druggists  not  keep-
ing it,  and  some  of  them  even  not  knowing  as  to  it,  and  if  you  cannot
obtain  it  of  your  druggist,  I  can  send  it  to  you  by  mail,  two  hundred  and
forty  grains  for  fifty  cents.  It  must  be  fresh,  and  what  you  do  not  use
must  be  kept  in  a  tight  glass  stoppered  bottle  to  retain  its  virtues  for  fu-
ture use.  Kamala  is  the  greatest  tape  worm  remedy  of  all.  I  am  satis-
fied and  sure  that  it  is,  and  since  I  first  made  it  public  in  my  second  edi-
tion of  this  book,  several  makers  of  worm  remedies  are  using  it  in  their
worm  preparations.  One  regular  physician  in  Mississippi  who  had  prac-
ticed medicine  for  forty  years,  and  who  bred  hounds,  not  knowing  of
Kamala,  ordered  it,  and  later  wrote  me  that  from  one  dog  he  got  eighty-
two  feet  of  tape  worm,  and  that  he  should  adopt  and  use  Kamala  here-
after in   his  practice  on   humans.
Dalziel  says  of  Tape  Worms. — "These  are,  as  the  name  indicates,  the
flat  worms  which  are  often  seen  evacuated  with  the  feces  in  small  sections
of  half  an  inch  or  less,  when  they  are  usually  called  'maw-worms;'  or  at
times  chains  of  them  may  be  seen  hanging  from  the  anus,  when  being
expelled  naturally  or  under  the  action  of  medicine.
"No  less  than  a  dozen  tapeworms  select  the  dog  as  their  host.  They
have  a  remarkable  life-history,  and  it  is  as  well  for  the  dog  owner  to
know  something  as  to  this,  as  he  is  often  puzzled  to  think  how  this  or
that  dog  became  infested.
"It  will  therefore  be  well  to  see  how  an  adult  tape  worm  is  made  up.
If  examined,  it  will  be  found  to  consist  of  a  head,  or  scolex,  and  a  series
of  segments,  scientifically  known  as  metameres.  These  latter  are  con-
stantly being  budded  off  from  the  head,  and  assume  forms  varying  with
their  age.  Thus  those  nearest  the  head  are  the  youngest,  and  those  at
the  other  extremity  the  oldest.  It  is  these  last  which  one  sees  from  time
to  time  pass  with  the  faecal  discharges.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  ripe  segments,
or  proglottids,  which  detach  themselves  from  the  hind  portion,  and  each
portion  thus  freed  is  endowed  with  reproductive  organs.     In   tim©  these
—
detached  portions  die  away,  but  the  eggs  contained  In  them  have  been
impregnated  by  spermatozoa  and  simply  await  another  host  to  begin  anew
the  cycle  of  existence.  The  eggs  thus  scattered  broadcast  are  not  influ-
•  enced  by  extremes  of  heat  or  cold,  dryness  or  moisture,  nor  does  time  seem
to  destroy  their  germinating  power.  From  this  it  will  readily  be  seen
how  important  it  is  to  burn  all  excreta  from  dogs  infested  with  tape  worms.
When  the  ripe  segments  leave  the  dog  per  anus  they  are  charged  with
ova,  and  possessing  the  power  of  motion,  wriggle  among  the  hair,  where
the  lice  and  fleas  devour  the  eggs  and  develop  into  the  cryptocysts  found
by  Grassi  free  in  the  abdominal  cavity.  The  dog  again,  in  searching  for
his  tormentors,  nibbles  and  licks  his  skin  and  coat,  and  in  this  way  swal-
lows the  insect,  and  when  the  contained  cryptocyst  is  set  free  in  the  dog's
stomach  the  tapeworm  is  once  more  developed.  The  nimble  flea  travels
so  readily  from  one  dog  to  another,  carrying  this  tape  worm  with  him,
that  we  have  here  an  explanation  of  what  has  puzzled  so  many — how  a
carefully  fed  and  groomed  house  dog  becomes  infested  with  tape  worm?"
Maw  Worms. — Treatment  for  Maw  Worms. — These  can  be  reached  and
expelled  by  the  following  injection  per  rectum:  Aloes,  1  dram.  Put  the
aloes  into  a  tea  cup  of  warm  water  and  then  put  it  into  a  bottle.  Inject
once  every  day,  until  no  more  are  to  be  seen  passing  from  the  dog.  Use
rubber  syringe  and  hold  rear  part  of  the  dog  up  for  five  minutes  after
injecting.  It  will  do  no  harm  and  facilitate  matters  by  having  given  an
hour  beforehand  a  dose  of  Kamala  (see  tape  worm),  as  the  Kamala  will
give  dog  a  thorough  cleaning  out,  and  with  this  start  expel  a  lot  of  these
worms.  The  Kamala  need  only  be  given  once  in  treating  for  maw  worms
— the  first  day  you  begin  treating  dog.
Another  good  injection  for  rectum  or  maw  worms  is  a  solution  of
quassia  chips.     A  handful  steeped  in  water  for  six  hours.
Yellows,  The. — See  Jaundice  and  Distemper.
Distemper. — This  disease  trouble  breeders  more  and  causes  more  deaths
than  anything  else,  except  perhaps  worm.  It  is  the  hardest  subject  I  have
to  handle  in  this  book,  and  as  too  much  information  on  this  dreaded  dis-
ease we  cannct  know,  I  have  secured  for  this  article  about  all  I  could  get.
Read  and  study  up  this  subject  before  distemper  appears,  so  as  to  be  then
prepared  to  attend  to  it  when  your  dogs  are  so' unfortunate  as  to  have  it.
It  is  not  a  foregone  conclusion  that  a  dog  must  die,  because  he  has  dis-
temper; I  have  had  many  dogs  get  it  and  get  well,  and  I  now  have  dogs
in  my  kennel  that  got  safely  over  it,  and-  these  same  dogs  afterwards  ex-
posed to  it  several-  times  and  did  not  again  have  it.  As  to  this,  I  believe
that  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  a  grown  dog  will  have  it  the  second
time,  if  exposed,  any  more  than  a  man  is  in  danger  of  getting  smallpox
after  having  passed  safely  through  it.  Lately  I  had  two  cases  of  distemper
in  my  kennel,  one  being  a  boarder,  a  Cocker  spaniel,  and  the  other,  one
of  my  own  poodles,  both  young  dogs  of  six  months.  Unfortunately  both
cases  proved  fatal,  but  I  checked  it  up  here  and  not  another  one  of  the
fifty  other  dogs  in  the  kennel  had  it  at  all,  which  was  indeed  lucky,  as  it
was  impossible  to  prevent  most  of  them  from  exposure  at  the  first  stages
of  the  disease  when  these  two  were  taken  down  with  it.  What  I  did  do,
however,  was  to  immediately  take  steps  to  prevent,  especially  the  young-
er dogs  from  getting  it.  This  I  did  by  at  once  isolating  the  ones  that  had
It,  thoroughly  disinfecting  all  kennels,  destroying  the  bedding  that  had  been
see  how  they  ate,  and  condition  of  passages,  and  am  glad  to  say  that  this
time  I  confined  it  to  the  two  that  died.
It  is  a  wise  plan  to  have  this  remedy  on  hand,  so  that  when  distemper
used,  and  then  putting  every  dOg  that  had  been  exposed  on  either  Clayton's
few  clays,  watching  every  dog  for  any  signs  of  distemper  coming,  also  as  to
Distemperine,  which  has  been  my  standby  for  years.  This  I  kept  up  for  a
comes,  you  can  go  to  work  on  the  dog  at  once,  and  not  make  it  worse  by
having  to  wait  till  you  can  get  the  remedy.  Since  writing  my  first  book
I  have  used  the  "Onion  Remedy"  of  my  friend,  William  Saxby,  the  Beagle
breeder  of  Ilion,  N.  Y.  This,  in  addition  to  other  treatment,  and  with  good
results,  as  it  can  do  no  harm  and  will  surely  do  good.  It  is  called  the
"Home   Made  Distemper   Cure,"   and   was   published   in   all   the  dog   papers:
Slice  a  sound  raw  onion  (the  stronger  the  better)  and  put  into  a
stocking  leg  and  with  safety  pins  fasten  around  the  dog's  neck,  with  the
onions  under  the  chin.  This  will  cause  the  discharge  to  be  watery;  renew
often  enough  to  keep  it  watery  (say  every  other  day)  and  with  careful
nursing  you  will  be  surprised  at  your  success.
How  to  diet  a  clog  during  distemper  is  a  question  to  which  the  answer
must  vary  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  It  goes  without
say  ng,  however,  that  in  all  cases  srd'd  meat  must  be  tabooed — anything
likely  to  raise  the  temperature  being  highly  unsuitable.  If  the  dog  is
purged  violently,  milk,  with  a  small  percentage  of  l-'me  water  added,  would
be  good,  as  would  also  port  wine  beaten  up  with  egg.  As  a  general  rule
tbe  safest  plan  is  to  dispense  with  solids  altogether,  and  feed  on  gruels,
broths,  beef  tea,  etc.,  remembering  that,  as  with  a  human  invalid  so  with  a
canine,  it  is  equally  of  importance  to  p  ovide  only  light,  easily-digested
nourishment,  since  the  stomach  is  affected  with  the  rest  of  the  body,  and
what  it  could  easily  assimilate  during  health,  it  has  no  means  of  dealing
with  during  sickness.
Dog  biscuits  and  all  farinaceous  solids  are  to  be  avoided  now.     A  little
gruel  made  with  fine  Oatmeal  and  boiling  milk  will  usually  be  taken,  espe-
cially if  not  too  thick.  Again,  though  we  dispense  with  meat,  gravy  may
be  offered  and  soup  made  by  boiling  bones.  As  the  animal  regains  his
strength  meat  may  be  recommended,  by  slow  degrees,  but  it  should  be
thoroughly  cooked,  and  it  might  also  be  minced  with  advantage,  as  the
dog,  even   in  sickness,  is  prone  to  his  natural  habit  of   "bolting"   food.
Another  excellent  food  we  have  found  for  invalid  dogs  is  the  family
rice  pudding — rice  baked  with  milk.  A  dog  will  generally  accept  this  and
it  forms  both  a  satisfying  and  nutritious  meal.
Keeping  them  eating  is  the  great  trouble — and  eat  they  must,  in  order
to  sustain  sufficient  strength  to  get  through  this  trying  ordeal.  When  the
dog  quits  eating  and  refuses  food,  try  and  coax  him  to  eat  by  getting  and
cooking  him  something  new  and  delicate  that  he  has  not  been  used  to
getting  ordinarily.  I  have  often  gone  out  and  bought  a  quail,  or  some
delicacy  like  this,  and  he  would  eat  it  when  he  had  refused  everything  else.
Gravy  made  with  flour  in  it,  from  stewed  chicken  giblets,  they  will  often  eat.
It  requires  patience  on  the  owner's  part  and  too  much  care  and  kind-
ness can  hardly  be  exercised,  as  they  materially  help  and  encourage  the
dog  to  pull  through.  Some  dogs  give  up  much  easier  than  others,  for  a
dog  with  distemper  is  a  very  sick  dog,  and  here  is  where  you  can  do