them  a  lot  of  good  in  keeping  up  their  courage  by  the  attention  you  bestow
on  them.  The  after  results  of  distemper  are  numerous  and  much  to  be
dreaded,  especially  in  cases  that  have  not  been  promptly  treated.  Chorea
is  the  worst  of  all  and  so  frequently  follows  distemper.
Now,  as  an  after  medicine  to  build  the  dog  up,  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills
will  work  wonders.  By  this  I  mean  after  your  dog  is  over  distemper,
yet  weak  and  very  much  run  down.  I  invariably  keep  my  dogs  on  these
pills  for  a  few  weeks  until  they  are  again  themselves,  and  look  and  act
like  well  dogs.
Distemper  is  not  necessarily  fatal  if  proper  care  and  treatment  is  given,
and  when  I  have  discovered  it  in  my  kennels,  I  do  not  give  up  and  think
they  will  die,  but  I  go  to  work  at  the  first  signs  and  try,  and  expect  to  save
them.  The  careful  nursing  and  attention  is  highly  important,  and  as  to
this,  every  authority  on  the  subject  will  agree.  The  dog  has  to  go  through
a  regular  siege  and  cannot  be  cured  in  a  few  days  by  any  medicine,  and
too  much  medicine  would  be  even  worse  than  none  at  all — here  is  where
the  good  nursing  comes  in.  If  you  do  this  part  all  right  and  can  keep
the  dog  eating  enough  of  the  proper  food  to  keep  its  strength  up,  and  the
surroundings  and  care  are  all  properly  looked  after,  the  dog  need  not  die.
There  is  another  important  point,  and  that  is  in  regard  to  a  dog's  bed-
ding. The  more  frequently  this  can  be  .changed  during  sickness  the  better.
When  I  have  taken  a  lot  of  dogs  to  a  bench  show,  my  own  and  others,
especially  if  I  knew  they  had  never  had  distemper,  I  have  always  made
it  a  rule  to  give  these  dogs  either  one  or  the  other  of  these  remedies  during
the  show,  and  for  a  few  days  after,  as  a  safeguard  against  their  contracting
distemper  at  the  show,  and  with  only  one  exception  in  many  years  of
exhibiting,  I  have  never  lost  a  dog  from  its  being  at  a  show.  I  believe,
if  this  was  made  a  practice  by  all  exhibitors  at  dog  shows,  that  we  would
not  hear  of  so  many  cases  of  distemper  as  an  after-result  of  exhibiting.
The  following  article  on  this  disease  was  written  by  Wm.  A.  Bruette,
D.  V.  S.,  ("Dent."),  the  well-  known  veterinary  surgeon  of  Chicago.  It
is  a  very  complete  and  comprehensive  treatise  on  the  subject  by  a  man
who  has  had  experience  with  dogs  for  years,  and  who,  besides  being  a
qualified  veterinarian,  is  also  a  gradute  in  human  practice  and  is  consid-
ered  reliable  authority  by  many  dog  fanciers:
"Distemper.  (By  Dent.)  Of  the  various  diseases  that  dogdom  is
heir  to  distemper  is  the  one  particular  black  cloud  to  the  breeder,  as  its
ravages  are  greater  among  the  finely  bred  dogs  kept  in  large  kennels,  or  as
pets,  whose  systems  are  weakened  by  in-and-in  breeding,  or  the  highly
artificial  life  they  are  forced  to  lead.  Dogs  of  low  degree  are  susceptible
to  the  malady,  but  rarely  succumb.  The  common  cur  when  attacked  re-
tires for  a  few  days  under  the  first  available  house  or  porch,  to  reappear
perhaps  a  little  thinner  and  more  careworn,  but  with  his  usual  indepen-
dence and   aggressiveness.
"The  disease  has  been  compared  to  typhoid  fever  in  man,  but  I  can
see  but  little  analogy  between  them.  Distemper  is  an  infantile  disorder;
typhoid  fever  is  not.  The  diseases  are  communicated  in  an  entirely  dif-
ferent manner.  The  characteristic  lesion  of  typhoid  fever  is  a  congestion
and  tumefaction  of  Pyer's  patches  (i.  e.,  small  collections  of  intestinal
glands).  In  distemper  the  mucous  membrane  lining  the  bowels,  when
the  alimentary  tract  is  the  seat  of  the  action  of  the  virus,  may  be  ulcerated
along  its  entire  course,"  but  the  patches  of  Pyer  are  not  particularly  affected
and  never  display  those  lesions  so  characteristic  of  typhoid.
"Of  the  various  diseases  man  is  subject  to,  measles  most  closely  re-
sembles distemper  in  dogs.  Both  are  infectious  infantile  disorders  trans-
mitted through  similar  channels,  and  one  attack  successfully  overcome
renders  immunity  from  a  second  through  the  course  of  the  animal's  life,
with  but  a  few  exceptions.  Catarrhal  symptoms,  pulmonary  complications
and  dysentery  are  common  to  both;  convulsions  also  appear  in  both  measles
and  distemper;  and  finally  the  principal  characteristic  of  measles,  viz:  the
rash,  which  develops  on  the  face  coincident  with  the  disease,  spreading
in  twenty-four  hours  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  resembles  the  rash  and
pinkish  prickly  condition  of  the  skin  noticeable  in  some  cases  of  distemper
in  the  first  stages,  and  the  pimples  that  break  out  along  the  back  and
under  the  belly  and  thighs,  and  the  dandruff  and  desquamation  of  the
cuticle  in  the  latter  stages  of  distemper.
"The  cause  of  distemper  has  been  and  is  a  subject  that  has  been  dis-
cussed and  disagreed  upon  by  authorities  and  breeders  of  experience  in  a
very  interesting  manner.  Some  hold  to  the  opinion  that  it  may  arise
spontaneously,  or  as  a  result  of  damp,  cold,  poorly  ventilated  kennels,
defective  drainage,  exposure,  general  neglect,  improper  putrescent  food
and  other  anti-hygienic  conditions.  More  modern  writers  hold  tenaciously
to  the  germ  theory,  discarding  altogether  and  scoffing  at  the  theory  of
spontaneity  as  being  based  solely  upon  negative  evidence  and  insist  that  the
disease  arises  and  exists  solely  as  a  result  of  infection  of  the  system  by
the  specific  virus  or  contagion  of  distemper,  and  claim  the  earlier  ideas
of  spontaneous  origin  are  based  solely  upon  failure  to  account  for  the
disease  by  infection,  and  to  observe  and  appreciate  the  remarkable  vitality
of  the  germ  and  the  ease  and  innumerable  channels  by  which  it  can  be
transmitted  from  an  infected  animal  to  one  that  was  to  all  intents  com-
pletely isolated.
"In  the  face  of  recent  scientific  investigation  and  discoveries,  and  in
a  disease  so  specifically  contagious  as  distemper,  it  is  impossible  to  discard
the  germ  theory.  The  distinctive  microbe  which  causes  the  disease — pro-
bably a  bacillus — has  not  been  isolated;  but  the  virus  has  been  cultivated,
and  in  the  seventh  generation  will  produce  the  disease  when  inoculated
in  dogs,  and  still  further  attenuations  of  the  virus  will  produce  the  disease
in  a  mild  form  which  affords  the  animal  protection  from  future  attacks.
These  experiments,  while  not  successful  in  all  ways,  point  conclusively  to
the  fact  that  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  this  disease  will  be  as
successfully   inoculated   against   as   smallpox   is   in   the   human   family.
"Most  dog  breeders  are  firm  in  the  conviction  that  they  have  had  cases
arise  spontaneously,  and  the  rapid  dissemination  the  disease  works  under
anti-hygenic  surroundings  will,  as  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  life
and  manner  in  which  specific  disease  producing  micro-organisms  operate,
entitle  hygienic  surroundings,  such  as  food,  light  and  air,  to  an  equal
footing  with  the  morbid  poison  so  far  as  the  severity  or  mortality  of  the
disease   is   concerned.
"Germs  and  microbes  of  various  kinds,  capable  of  producing  specific
diseases,  are  found  everywhere  in  earth,  air  and  water.  All  animals  swal-
low them  in  their  food,  breathe  them  into  their  lungs  in  countless  num-
bers, and  the  body  is  at  all  times  in  contact  with  them,  nevertheless  they
produce  no  disturbance  of  the  system.  In  experiments  microbes  introduced
Into   the   blood   of   healthy   animal*   were   Inactive,   whereas   if   the   same
an'mal  became  impoverished  and  weakened  through  foul  air,  impure  food
or  water,  or  defective  elimination,  the  blood  became  impure  or  loaded
with  decomposed  matter;  and  an  appropriate  pabulum  was  created  in
which  the  germs  lived,  multiplied  and  set  up  their  specific  morbid  action
to  the  detr.ment  and  possible  destruction  of  the  economy.  The  natural
ccnclus  en  is  that  while  the  specific  germ  is  necessary  for  the  production
of  a  specific  disease,  it  is  equally  essential  that  the  system  be  in  such  a
condition  as  to  afford  a  proper  pabulum  for  the  reproduction,  which  is
necessary  for  its  specific  action,  otherwise  it  would  be  overcome  by  the
economy  and  eliminated  from  the  system;  just  as  grains  of  wheat  reproduce
ihemseives  and  are  potent  under  proper  conditions  of  earth,  air,  water  and
heat,  or  are  inert  and  disintegrate  when  thier  surroundings  are  unsuitable.
"Germs  do  not  at  all  times  attack  the  same  organs  and  membranes.
But  the  discharge  from  the  particular  set  affected  contains  the  virus  in  its
most  concentrated  form.  This  accounts  for  the  dread  breeders  have  formed,
through  experience,  of  the  nasal  discharges  of  an  affected  animal,  and  for
the  v'gorous  objection  frequently  raised  at  a  dog  show  by  some  veteran
owner  who  has  observed  a  careless  attendant  allowing  the  dogs  to  drink
from  a  bucket  he  is  carrying  from  stall  to  stall  instead  of  filling  the  dogs'
pans.  *
"Distemper  is  not  transmissible  to  man,  but  is  to  cats,  wolves,  foxes,
jackals,  hyenas  and  monkeys;  and  as  is  the  case  in  many  highly  conta-
gious diseases,  one  attack  successfully  overcome  with  but  few  exceptions
renders  immunity  from  a  second  attack  of  the  malady.  One  of  the  theo-
ries advanced  as  an  explanation  of  this  fact  is  that  in  contagious  diseases
the  specific  poison  combines  with  some  chemical  constituent  of  the  sys-
tem which  is  essent'al  to  the  production  of  the  disease,  and  that  after
tlrs  constituent  has  been  destroyed — as  it  will  be  through  combining  with
the  germ- — and  the  animal  has  recovered  It  is  impossible  for  the  germ  to
produce  system'c  disturbances  again  because  the  constituent  necessary  for
its  combination   is  absent  from  the  system.
"There  are  innumerable  channels  through  which  a  dog  may  be  infected
with  distemper.  The  germ  is  of  remarkable  vitality,  and  is  conveyed
through  the  air  or  on  a  person's  clothes,  or  a  dog  which  has  already  had
the  disease  can  convey  the  germ  in  its  coat  from  a  sick  dog  to  a  well  one.
The  use  of  kennels,  feeding  dishes,  or  shipping  crates  that  have  been
previously  used  by  an  affected  animal  are  common  modes  of  inoculation.
Dog  shows  are  a  fertile  source  of  the  spread  of  the  disease,  and  no  matter
how  carefully  the  portable  benching  has  been  cleaned  and  disinfected  it  is
always  more  or  less  a  conveyance  for  the  germs  that  produce  the  disease.
"The  popular  fallacy  of  a  meat  diet  being  productive  of  distemper
is  entirely  at  variance  with  all  scientific  knowledge,  as  all  carnivorous
animals  are  markedly  free  from  specific  germ   diseases.
"The  morbid  poison  of  distemper  attacks  dogs  in  different  ways,'  but
breeders  and  pract;ticners  as  a  rule  recognize  as  typical  only  those  cases
in  wh'ch  the  virus  affects  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  eyes  and  nasal
passage  and  produces  a  catarrhal  discharge.  In  some  cases  the  intestinal
tract  is  the  particu'ar  field  upon  which  the  virus  exerts  itself;  or  the
liver  mav  be  affected,  or  the  bronchial  tubes."  But  the  action  of  the  virus
that  i?  least  understood,  and  the  symptoms  most  commonly  ascribed  to
some  other  cause,  is  when  it  is  concentrated  upon  the  brain  and  ner-
vous system,  the  animal  dying  from  collapse  without  any  premonitory
s  mptoms  or  developing  epileptic  spasms  and  convulsions,  and  other
symptoms  that  the  breeder  ascribes  to  worms;  and  the  puppy  is  dosed
accord  ngly.  I  have  lnd  such  cases  in  my  own  experience  as  a  breeder,
a  d  mv  attention  has  been  frequently  called  to  this  condition  of  things
bv  others  whose  puppies  have  died  in  from  a  few  hours  to  a  week  with
all  th?  svmptoms  of  worm-fits,  careful  dissection,  however,  failing  to  reveal
th  presence  of  th<*se  pests  or  any  other  exciting  cause;  and  distemper,
from  an  absence  of  all  catarrhal  and  febril  symptoms,  would  be  the  last
thing  thought  of.
"An  attack  of  distemper  of  the  ordinary  catarrhal  form  is  usually  pre-
ceded  by  listlessness  and  loss  of  appetite;  the  animal  avoids  the  light
and  courts  solitude;  all  the  symptoms  of  a  common  cold  will  then  mani-
fest themselves  rapidly,  as  sneezing,  a  dry  husky  cough  and  a  watery
discharge  from  the  eyes  and  nose;  the  animal  shivers,  seeks  warmth  and
is  feverish,  the  pulse  rang.ng  from  one  hundred  and  twenty  to  one  hundred
and  fifty  beats  per  minute;  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  lining  of  the
eye  reddened,  and  the  small  veins  that  radiate  through  the  white  portion
are  injected  with  blood;  the  tongue  is  coated,  the  secretion  of  saliva  is  dim  n-
ished,  thiist  is  excessive,  food  is  rejected  and  prostiation  is  well  marked
and  so  rapid  that  at  the  end  of  a  week  the  dog  can  hardly  stand;  the  bowels
are  irregular;  in  the  early  stages  of  the  disease  there  is  a  tendency  to  con-
stipation, but  the  matter  in  the  intestines-  through  failure  to  digest  sets
up  an  irritation,  and  the  discharges  are  more  frequent  and  looser  than  in
health,  and  the  feces  are  dark  colored  and  fetid.  The  discharges  from  the
eyes  and  nose  become  purulent,  the  nostrils  are  covered,  with  a  glassy,
yellowish  fluid,  the  cough  increases  in  frequency,  the  bronchial  tubes  fill
with  mucus,  which  is  coughed  up,  giving  temporary  relief;  the  animal  vomits
frothy  yellow  matter  and  is  unable  to  retain  food  upon  the  stomach;  the
eyelids  become  glued  together,  resulting  in  blinding  the  patient;  breathing
is  obstructed  by  matter  in  the  nostrils;  the  breath  becomes  fetid  and  has  a
smell  that  is  peculiar  to  the  disease;  the  lips  are  covered  with  ulcers,  and
the  animal  either  becomes  weaker  and  weaker  and  finally  succumbs,  or  at
the  end  of  twelve  or  fourteen  days  the  symptoms  mentioned  above  abate
in  intensity  and  the  animal  slowly  retails  its  strength.  Complications,
however,  frequently  develop  early  in  the  disease,  and  result  in  the  death
of  the  animal.
"One  of  the  complications  of  distemper  is  pneumonia,  or  inflammation
of  the  lungs,  brought  on  by  exposure  to  cold  or  by  a  weakened  heart  action.
The  animal  will  not  lie  down,  but  assumes  a  sitting  position  with  the  fore-
legs braced  and  separated,  the  head  hangs  heavily,  breathing  is  labored,
lapid  and  heavy,  and  upon  application  of  the  ear  to  the  chest,  a  dry  cracking
sound  will  be  heard  similar  to  that  made  when  walking  upon  dry  snow
with   a   clean   boot.
"Epileptic  fits  are  another  complication,  These  as  a  rule  come  on
suddenly.  There  is  a  slight  quivering  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  and
an  anxious  look  around,  a  few  staggering  steps,  and  the  animal  falls  upon
its  side  and  loses  consciousness;  the  face  becomes  distorted,  the  limbs
work  violently,  and  there  is  a  continued  champing  of  the  jaws  as  well
fts  a  frothy  mucus  coming  from  the  mouth;  the  head,  limbs  and  body
jerk  violently,  the  convulsions  gradually  become  less  and  less,  though
sometimes  the  animal  comes  out  of  them  suddenly  and  appears  dazed  and
scared,  and  will  attempt,  to  hide  in  some  out  of  the  way  place.
"Vomiting  and  purging  are  prominent  complications,  and  sometimes
there  is  true  dysentery  in  which  the  feces  are  streaked  with  blood.
"In  summing  up  this  disease  and  arriving  at  a  proper  treatment  we
must  be  rn'ndful  of  the  fact  that  all  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  the
direct  results  of  a  morbid  virus  existing  in  the  system,  and  that  the  course
it  runs,  although  indefinite,  is  nevertheless  certain,  and  the  a'm  should
be  directed  not  only  at  the  disease,  but  at  sustaining  the  system  so  as  to
enable  it  to  withstand  the  debilitating  effects  of  the  virus  and  the  febrile
condition  it  gives  rise  to.  The  promiscuous  administrations  of  exhaust-
ing and  dangerous  medicines,  such  as  many  dog  owners  and  veterinar-
ians are  to  indulge  in,  cannot  be  too  highly  condemned.
"Warm  quarters,  good  care  and  nursing  are  the  prime  factors  in  the
successful  treatment  of  this  disease.  Judicious  medical  treatment  is  of
unquestionable  service  in  hold'ng  the  disease  in  check,  a'laviating  alarm-
ing symptoms,  preventing  destructive  complication  and  hastening  convales-
cence. But  no  matter  how  skillfully  applied  it  will  be  without  ava;l  if
the  nursing  and  attendance  are  neglected,  whereas,  many  dogs,  properly
cared  for,  make  nice  recoveries  without  medical  assistance.  Place  the
patient  in  warm,  comfortable  quarters,  absolutely  free  from  drafts;  see
that  his  bedding  is  changed,  daily,  and  all  discharge  from  the  nose  and
eyes  sponged  away  as  gently  as  possible  with  warm  water,  bo  as  not  to
disturb  the  patient.  The  food  offered  should  be  highly  nutritious  and
easily  digestible,  such  as  beef  tea  or  mutton  broth  thickened  with  rice  or
well  boiled  oatmeal.  The  feeding  dishes  and  drinking  pans  must  be
scrupulously  clean,  as  dirty  pans  will  nauseate  a  sick  animal  and  destroy
what  little  appetite  it  may  have.  Scraped  raw  beef  is  very  nutritious
and  can  be  mixed  with  gelatine;  a  dog  will  frequently  eat  this  when  it
will  refuse  everything  else.  "When  the  appetite  fails  altogether  and  the
animal  refuses  to  eat,  food  must  be  forced  down  its  throat  at  least  four
times  a  day.  For  this  use  beef  extracts  or  beef  tea  with  the  addition  of  a
raw  egg,  a  cupful  at  a  time  four  times  a  day  for  a  fifty-pound  dog;  and
if  that  quantity  irritates  the  stomach  it  must  be  divided  and  given  oftener.
If  the  patient  becomes  very  weak  a  little  sherry  or  brandy  must  be  given
in  milk  punches  to  keep  up  the  general  strength.
"In  the  first  stage  of  the  disease  the  bowels  are  generally  irregular,
due  to  the  accumulation  of  undigested  matter  in  the  intestines;  it  is  ad-
visable to  move  this  by  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  varying  in  quantiy  from  a  tea-
spoonful  for  a  small  dog  to  an  ounce  and  a  half  for  a  large  dog.
"After  this  has  operated  the  most  useful  drug  I  have  found  for  rati-
fying the  system  against  the  ravages  of  the  poison  and  checking  what
would  otherwise  be  a  severe  attack  is  hyposulphite  of  soda.  The  particular
property  of  this  drug  either  within  or  without  the  system  is  to  destroy  fer-
ments and  bacteria,  and  experiments  have  conclusively  proven  its  benefits
in  all  diseases  where  morbid  poisons  are  at  work.  Blood  drawn  from  dogs
that  have  been  given  thirty  grains  a  day  for  five  days  kept  fresh  for  three
weeks;  the  blood  of  dogs  similarly  treated  with  the  exception  of  not  having
the  sulphate  became  putrid  in  three  or  four  days.  Dogs  that  had  re-
ceived the  sulphite  in  thirty  grain  dosps  with  their  food  for  five  days  and
were  then  injected  with  fetid  pus  or  the  purulent  discharge  from  a  glan-
dered  horse  reeled,  tottered,  and  were  unable  to  walk  for  a  few  hours,
but  at  the  end  of  five  davs  recovered  their  health  and  appetite,  the  wound
where  the  injection  had  been  made  healing  nicely.  Dogs  treated  similarly
in  every  way  with  the  exception  of  not  having  previously  received  the
hyposulphite  died  in  from  the  fourth  to  the  sixth  day  with  a  purulent  dis-
charge from  the  eyes  and  nostrils,  and  the  point  where  the  injection  was
made  became  gangrenous.  The  dose  of  this  drug  is  from  two  to  twenty
grains,  depending  upon  the  age  and  size  of  the  patient,  and  the  condition
of  the  bowels;   if  they  become  too  loose  the  dose  must  be  decreased.
"Quinine  Is  another  drug  of  great  value  in  the  treatment  of  distemper
and  all  febrile  conditions.  Its  use  is,  however,  abused  from  a  failure  to
understand  its  real  action!  as  a  rule  too  large  doses  are  given  and  at  too
frequent  intervals.  The  action  of  quinine,  besides  lowering  temperature
and  pulsation,  is  in  small  doses  tonic  and  stimulating,  increasing  the
apnetite  and  all  digestive  secretions;  in  large  doses  continued  it  is  de-
pressing and  destrovs  the  appetite.  It  has  remarkable  antiseptic  proner-
ti>s,  attacking  and  destroying  all  pernicious  micro-organisms.  A  full  dose
(five  grains  for  a  St.  Bernard)  given  at  the  first  sign  of  lassitude  and  de-
fection of  nremonitorv  svmptoms  of  an  attack  of  distemper,  while  it  mav
Tint  prevpnt  the  disease,  will  certainly  moderate  it.  Its  use  should
then  be  discontinued  until  the  fifth  or  sixth  day  of  the  disease,  when
small  doses  of  from  one  to  five  grains  should  be  given  three  times  a  day,
but  discontinued  if  any  signs  of  disagreeing  with  the  dog  are  shown.
"Pulmonary  complications  can  be  relieved  bv  applying  hot  flannels  to
the  sides  or  the  use  of  hot  water  bags.  Hot  fomentations  or  bandages
wrung  out  of  warm  water  do  more  harm  than  good,  as  the  animal  gen-
erally gets  chilled  while  they  are  being  used.
"Nitrate  of  potash  may  be  given  in  the  dog's  drinking  water  or  in
s'x  to  fifteen  grain  doses;  it  reduces  fever  and  stimulates  the  action  of  the
kidneys.
"If  the  pulse  and  temperature  are  very  high  a  few  doses  of  veratrum
can  be  given  with  advantage,  but  not  continued  for  more  than  two  daya.
The  dose  is  from  one-tenth  to  one-third  of  a  grain  of  the  powder,  at  in-
tervals of  three  or  four  hours.
"Epileptic  fits  and  nervous  symptoms  are  difficult  to  treat  with  any
degree  of  success  during  the  course  of  the  disease.  If  they  are  due  to
reflex  action,  as  from  the  patient  cutting  teeth,  lance  the  gums;  if  due  to
worms,  the  system  is  generally  too  debilitated  to  stand  the  powerful  drugs
necessary  to  remove- or  destroy  these  pests.  The  patient,  however,  can  be
temporarily  relieved  by  bromide  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  grains,
four  or  five  times  a  day,  either  in  a  capsule  or  a  watery  solution.  If  the
excitement  is  extreme  the  bromide  can  be  combined  with  from  three  to
ten  grains  of  chloral.  The  latter  drug,  when  administered,  should  be  mixed