these  growths.  Their  presence  may  prevent  the  valves  from  working:
properly,  or  one  may  be  whipped  off,  and  thus  block  the  circulation.
Sudden    death   may   occur.
Evertion  should  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible;  but  this  stite  can
only  be  surmised  during  life,   as  in   the  case  of  the  former  disease.
Follicular  Mange — See  Mange.
Founder  of  the  Chest — See   Kennel   Lameness.
Fracture. — See   Bones   Broken.
Gastritis See  Stomach,  Inflammation  of
Gatherings. — See  Abscess  and  Boils.
Glass   Eye. — See   Amaruosis.
Glossitis. — See  Tongue,   Inflammation   of
Fractures. — While  fractures  are  not  of  frequent  occurrence  in  well-
ordered  kennels,  they  belong  to  that  category  of  accidents  against  which
there  is  sometimes  no  safeguard.  A  sudden  twist,  stopping  in  some  hid-
den cavity  while  galloping  over  a  field,  jumping  a  fence,  or  from  a  car-
riage (one  of  the  cleanest  breaks  of  a  hind  leg  occurred  to  a  foxterrier
bitch  of  ours  while  jumping  off  the  carriage  seat  and  catching  her  hind
leg  in  the  wire  rail  guard  at  the  end  of  the  seat),  so  one  never  knows
when  such  accidents  will  happen.  Simple  fractures  are  so  termed  when
a  bone  is  broken  into  two  pieces  only;  where  a  bone  is  broken  into  several
pieces  it  is  termed  comminuted,  and  when  the  ends  of  the  broken  bone
pierce  the  skin  it  is  a  compound  fracture,  which  is  the  worst  of  all  in  the
piecing.  To  detect  a  simple  fracture  is  not  always  easy,  though  of
course  the  other  two  conditions  are  more  or  less  self-evident.  In  the
case  of  a  simple  fracture,  the  limb  should  be  taken  hold  of  above  the
bruise  or  injury  with  one  hand  and  with  the  other  gently  move  the  lower
portion  of  the  limb.  If  the  bone  or  bones  are  fractured  a  grating  noise
will  be  heard  and  the  jar  of  the  broken  bone  can  be  felt.
In  treating  this  condition  great  care  must  be  exercised  in  bringing
the  broken  ends  together,  and  it  is  best  that  the  services  of  a  surgeon  be
procured.  In  case  that  is  not  available,  or  a  home  cure  is  decided  upon,
the  ends  of  the  fractured  bones  should  be  brought  opposite  each  other,
and  then  splints,  well  secured  by  bandages,  must  be  applied  to  keep  them
in  their  places  until  the  two  ends  are  joined.  This  is  generally  from
three  to  four  weeks  in  the  case  of  a  puppy,  and  from  a  month  to  six
weeks  in  a  matured  dog.  If  the  case  is  not  attended  to  immediately  after
the  accident  the  parts  swell,  and  this  swelling  has  to  be  reduced  before
any  attempt  can  be  made  to  set  the  bones,  and  cold  water  or  ice  applied
to  the  swelling  will  easily  reduce  it.  Before  applying  the  splints  it  is
necessary  to  wind  a  bandage  around  the  limb  two  or  three  times  from
the  bottom  to  the  top,  as  this  has  the  effect  of  preventing  the  splints
from  causing  unnecessary  irritation.  The  splints,  which  are  best  made
of  wood  of  about  one-sixteenth  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  of  sufficient  length
to  extend  over  the  whole  straight  surface  of  the  limb,  should  be  four  in
number,  viz.,  one  for  the  front  of  the  leg,  one  for  the  back  and  one  for
either  side  of  it,  and  they  should  be  just  wide  enough  to  cover  the  part
of  the  leg  on  Which  they  are  placed.  Before  applying  them,  the  inside
of  each  should  be  smeared  with  hot  pitch,  cobbler's  wax  or  some  such
6ubstance,  so  that  they  will  adhere  to  the  bandage  and  not  slip,  and  then
another  bandage,  which  should  be  of  considerable  length  (about  six  yards
long)  and  one  inch  and  a  half  to  two  inches  wide,  and  which  has  been
previously  soaked  in  a  thick  solution  of  gum  or  common  starch,  should  be
wound  round  the  limb  from  bottom  to  top.  The  object  of  the  starch  or
gum  solution  is  to  give  additional  support,  which  it  does  when  it  gets  stiff
and  hardens.  After  the  operation  the  dog  should  be  put  into  a  quiet  place
— a  large  hamper  or  crate  does  very  well — so  that  he  can  rest  and  not
move  about;  but  it  often  happens  that  the  next  day  the  part  of  the  limb
below  the  bandage  is  found  to  be  swollen;  if  so  the  latter  should  be
loosened  for  a  short  time,  but  it  must  be  tightened  again  when  the  swell-
ing  subsides.
The  above  treatment  is  of  course  only  advised  in  the  case  of  simple
fractures  where  an  amateur  may  indulge  his  surgical  skill.
Fits. — Dalziel  so  fully  and  ably  handles  this  subject  that  I  give  his
article  entire,  as  it  covers  the  whole  ground.  I  have  been  governed  by
his  ideas  in  treating  many  cases  and  the  success  I  had  leads  me  to  endorse
his  treatment:
"Fits  are  of  common  occurrence,  especially  in  puppies — fortunately
those  that  are  of  a  dangerous  and  fatal  character  are  the  most  rare;  they
often  cause  needless  alarm,  but  the  dog  suffering  from  a  fit  of  whatever
kind  is  not  an  object  to  be  frightened  at,  but  to  be  commiserated  and
helped,  and  this  requires  freedom  from  a  fear  for  which  there  is  no  just
reason.  Fits  are  of  many  kinds,  and  may  be  classified  as  apoplectic  fits,
distemper  fits,  fits  from  teething,  fits  from  worms,  and  suckling  fits,  and
other  causes  of  excitement  are  known  to  produce  them,  even  high  notes
of  music,  to  which  some  dogs  show  a  strong  objection  and  are  decidedly
harmful.
Apoplectic  Fits  are  caused  by  pressure  on  the  brain  from  distended
blood-vessels  or  effusions  of  blood.  The  subjects  of  attack  are  generally
those  dogs  that  are  kept  in  idleness  and  over-fed,  and  the  attack  may  be
the  result  of  the  animal  over-loading  the  stomach  with  food  difficult  of
digestion.  The  symptoms  are  loud,  labored  breathing;  the  dog  lies  mo-
tionless on  its  side  in  a  state  of  insensibility — there  is  no  frothing  at
the  mouth  or  champing  of  the  jaws,  but  the  eyes  are  fixed  and  often  blood-
shot. Such  cases  are  usually  fatal,  and  death  is  frequently  instantan-
eous. Prompt  bleeding  is  the  most  likely  means  of  saving  the  patient;
and  then,  soon  as  sufficiently  recovered,  a  strong  purge  should  be  given,
or  clysters  administered.  Should  these  means  prove  successful,  it  will
be  necessary  to  use  extreme  care  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  the  fit.  The
dog's  diet  must  be  carefully  regulated,  sufficient  healthful  exercise  al-
lowed, or  compelled,  if  need  be,  and  occasional  doses  of  cooling  medicine
given.  Clayton's  or  Dent's  Blood  Cooling  Pills  will  be  just  the  thing  to
give.     Apoplexy  in   the  dog  is  not  often  seen  in  practice.
Distemper  Fits  are  caused  by  congestion  or  inflammation  of  the  brain,
and  often  prove  fatal.
Epileptic  Fits  are  not  dangerous,  but  of  very  common  occurrence,
especially  during  the  heated  term,  and  generally  happen  when  the  dog  is
at  exercise — sometimes  in  the  case  of  pointers  they  are  seized  when  on
the-  point,  doubtless  from  the  undue  excitement  produced.  When  the
dog  is  attacked  he  is  first  observed  to  tremble  on  his  legs,  and  on  trying
to  run  on  he  staggers  and  falls  down  on  his  side,  frequently  uttering  a
low  moan.  Struggling  to  his  feet  he  attempts  to  move,  only  to  repeat  the
fall,  when  he  lies  stupefied  and  insensible.  The  legs  and  the  whole  mus-
cular system  are  violently  convulsed,  the  clog  froths  at  the  mouth,  the
head  is  violently  moved,  often  knocked  against  the  ground,  the  jaws  are
champed  together,  and  sometimes  the  tongue  gets  lacerated  between  the
teeth,  and  the  froth  from  his  mouth  becomes  tinged  with  blood;  the
breathing  during  the  fit  is  labored  and  irregular.  The  fit  generally  lasts
several  minutes.  When  the  convulsions  have  subsided,  the  dog  raises
his  head,  opens  his  eyes  with  a  look  of.surpri.se,  and  very  shortly  runs
about  as  if  nothing  had  happened.
The  treatment  during  an  epileptic  fit  is  to  generally  carry  the  dog  to
a  dry  place  where  there  is  some  soft  material  so  that  he  cannot  hurt
himself  in  his  struggles.  As  soon  after  as  possible  give  him  a  dose  of
Anti-spasmodic  Drops:  Compound  spirits  of  sulphuric  ether  (known  as
Hoffman's  anodyne),  and  tincture  of  opium  (laudanum),  equal  parts.
(Keep  well  corked  and  cool.)  Dose  for  15  to  35  lb.  dog  would  be  a
teaspoonful  in  two  tablespoonfuls  of  milk.  Larger  dogs  nearly  a  dessert-
spoonful as  a  dose — and  leave  him  quiet  in  a  warm,  comfortable  kennel.
Endeavor  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  the  fit.  If  from  over-feeding,  reduce
the  diet  and  give  gentle  exercise,  and,  if  need  be,  repeated  doses  of  cool-
ing medicine;  3  gr.  of  bromide  of  potash  for  a  20  lb.  to  40  lb.  clog  twice
a  clay  in  water  for  a.  week  will  be  beneficial  to  dogs  predisposed  to  epi-
lepsy.
Suckling  Fits  are  produced  by  exhaustion  consequent  on  the  bitch
having  too  many  pups  left  on  her.  She  lies  or  falls  down  breathing  heavily,
becomes  insensible,  and  is  frequently  much  convulsed.  Remove  all  the
pups  but  one  or  two,  which  must  meanwhile  be  fed  on  the  bottle,  or  by
spoon,  condensed  milk — a  little  at  a  time  but  often — and  let  the  mother
have  a  generous  diet,  and  if  much  reduced  give  Clayton's  or  Dent's  Con-
dition  Pills  for  a  week   or  so.
Fits    from    Distemper The    following    is    from    the    American    Field
and  is  prescribed  for  by  Dent,   their  veterinarian:
"I  have  an  English  setter  bitch,  twenty  months  old,  which  has  dis-
temper. I  thought  her  about  over  it,  when  a  few  days  ago  she  had  a  fit  •
which  lasted  about  3  minutes;  she  got  up  and  seemed  scared,  had  a  wild
look  in  her  eyes  and  seemed  unable  to  see  well.  She  has  those  fits  now
once  or  twice  a  day  and  is  very  weak,  but  eats  well,  though  hardly  able  to
stand  up.  The  fits  she  has.  now  are  of  shorter  duration  but  she  seems
much  weaker  just  after  one;  she  has  a  fit  soon  after  she  begins  to  eat
and  is  disturbed  every  morning;  after  she  gets  over  it  she  will  finish  her
breakfast  of  soup  and  rice  or  milk.  Will  she  necessarily  die  or  is  she
incurable?  I  have  had  a  good  deal  of  experience  with  distemper  and
have  lost  eight  four-months-old  puppies  this  Fall,  but  I  have  never  lost
any  as  old  as  this  one.     Ans—  Give  twenty  grains  of  the  bromide  of  soda
and   one-thirtieth   of  a   grain   of  arsenic   three   times  a   day;    w«   think  she
will  recover.-"
Teething  Fits  often  occur  during  the  cutting  of  the  first  teeth,  but
more  frequently  when  the  permanent  ones  are  being  irrupted.  Lancing  the
gums  is  sometimes  resorted  to,  but  as  a  rule  a  little  opening  medicine  is  all
that  is  needed.  Convulsions  are  frequently  present  in  these  fits,  as  also  in
those  due  to  worms.
Fits  Due  to  Worms. — When  these  parasites  are  the  producing  cause,
that  fact  may  be  ascertained  by  examining  the  fasces  voided  during  or  just
after  the  fit,  as  some  of  them  will  probably  be  seen.  Or  the  presence  of
worms  may  be  determined  by  the  symptoms  given  under  that  head,  and
to   Worms   you   are   referred.
Feet,  Sore. — Dogs  that  travel  very  much,  sporting  dogs  that  hunt
over  rough  ground  or  short  stubble,  are  apt  to  get  the  pads  of  the  feet
contused  and  worn  thin.
Treatment  depends  on  extent  of  the  injury.  If  feet  are  only  tender
and  slightly  inflamed,  bathe  with  cold  water,  afterward  applying  freely
the  following  lotion.
Tincture    of  arnica     Vs    ounce
Tincture   of  matico    Vz    ounce
Tincture    of  opium     1   ounce
Acetic    acid  %    ounce
Water   enough   to   till   a   wine   bottle.
In  severe  cases  apply  a  poultice  of  half  bran  and  half  boiled  turnips.
If  the  inflammation  is  great,  and  the  feet  become  swollen,  hot  and  pain-
ful, so  that  the  dog  cannot  stand,  the  general  health  suffers,  as  fever-
ishness  and  loss  of  appetite  will  reduce  his  strength;  matter  will  form
in  his  feet  or  perhaps  his  soles  will  slough  off.
In  such  extreme  cases,  add  linseed  meal  to  the  other  ingredients  and
pour  a  little  olive  oil  over  its  surface.  The  dog-  should  have  a  mild  aperient
and  a  dose  of  the  following  fever  mixture:
Powdered    nitre     1   dram
Sweet    spirits    of   nitre    ' %    ounce
Mindererus   spirits    1 V2   ouncs
Wine   of   antimony    1   dram
Water     4   ounces
Dose  for  a  30  lb.  to  50  lb.  dog  would  be  a  tablespoonful  every  four  hours  in
a  little  gruel.
Dog  should  be  kept  on  a  light  diet.  Sometimes,  for  more  speedy  relief,
it  is  well  to  let  the  water  out  with  a  lancet,  and  in  all  respects  these  cases
should  be  treated  as  ulcers.
Goitre,  or  Bronchocelc — This  term  is  applied  to  a  swelling  or  lump
that  appears  on  the  front  part  of  the  neck,  known  as  the  thyroid  gland.
It  is  soft  and  elastic  to  the  touch,  and  appears  to  give  no  pain  except  when
treatment  is  neglected  and  it  increases  to  such  a  size  as  to  interfere  with
the  breathing.  It  is  especially  a  disease  of  old  dogs,  although  it  often
occurs  in  ill-fed  and  scrofulous  puppies.  If  will  appear  in  a  night,  and  is
sometimes  due  to  a  cold  caught,  which  settles  in  the  glands  of  the  throat.
The  latest,  and'  I  have  found  by  having  to  treat  many  cases,  is  Iodin  Vasigin,
full  strength,  which  apply  twice  daily,  rubbing  well  in  with  the  hands  as
you  would  apply  a  liniment.  Another  good  remedy  to  apply  same  as  aboce,
is,  Iodidode  of  Potassium,  one  dram  to  seven  ounces 'of  lard  (well  mixed).
Aside  from  external  treatment  give  cod  liver  oil — from  a  teaspoonful  for
a  20  lb.  dog,  up  to  two  tablespoonfuls  for  a  dog  like  a  pointer  or  St.
Bernard,  three  times  a  day.  If  abscesses  form  they  must  be  lanced.  Dogs
suffering  from  Goitre  should  be  extra  well  fed.  Painting  with  tincture  of
iodine,  one  a  day,  is  as  good  as  'anything  you  can  do.
Gatherings. — See  Abscesses.
Gastritis. — Symptoms  very  pronounced  in  the  acute  form,  first  vom-
iting, pain  and  tenderness.  The  position  of  the  animal  is  often  charac-
teristic. The  animal  lies  stretched  out  on  his  belly.  There  is  not  the  same
tendency  to  arched  back  as  in  colic.
Here  is  another  "old  fashioned"  remedy,  that  I  have  found  most  suc-
cessful. Get  a  dime's  worth  of  Slippery  Elm  bark,  cut  it  up,  pour  a  quart
of  water  over  it,  then  set  it  in  another  vessel  of  water,  and  boil  'till  it
makes  an  emulsion  like  mucilage.  Give  dog  a  tablespoonful,  (small  toys
half  this),  three  times  a  day  before  feeding.  Feed  light,  soft  foods  for
a   few  days.     Milk  peptonized   is  very  good.
If  there  is  constipation,  Enemas  must  be  given.
"Water  must  be  given  sparingly,  only  a  small  quantity  at  a  time  and
quite  cold.
Gleet. — Blaine  gives  this  name  to  a  discharge  from  the  prepuce,  but
it  appears  to  me  the  name  is  misleading.  For  further  information  see
Penis,  Discharge  from,  which,  although  not  perhaps  strictly  correct,  is
adopted  as  being  the  most  generally  useful  and  readily  understood  heading.
Professor  Law,  however,  enumerates  both  Gleet  and  Gonorrhoea  among
the  diseases  of  dogs.
Heart,  Valvular  Disease  of. — A  very  fatal  form  of  heart  disease.  The
pulse  is  perceptibly  irregular  and  feeble.  A  post-mortem  will  show  the
valves  thickened,  and  may  present  upon  their  surfaces  granulations  which
feel  under  the  finger  like  minute  particles  of  sand.  Treatment  is  of  no
avail;  but  to  prevent  sudden  death  all  undue  excitement  should  be  avoided.
Harvest  Bugs. — These  come  in  summer  and  are  sometimes,  but  not
often,  troublesome  to  dogs  as  well  as  man.     They  burrow  in  the  skin,  as
does  the  parasite  in  mange.     Eberhart's  Skin  Cure  applied  twice  a  day,  as
in  mange,  will  soon  destroy  them.
Haematuria  (Bloody  Urine). — Dogs  have  this  trouble,  being  the  re-
sult of  calculi  situated  in  the  bladder,  kidney  or  urethra.  Irritation  and
inflammation  are  caused  by  these  foreign  bodies,  and  also  injure  the  mu-
cous membrane,  producing  abrasions  and  superficial  bleeding,  the  blood
being  passed  with  the  urine.  A  blow  across  the  back  may  also  cause  it.
Upon  pressing  the  dog's  loins  pain  is  evinced,  and  there  is  also  a  certain
amount  of  irritation  caused  by  passing  the  urine.  Blood  is  sometimes
mixed  with  the  latter,  or  it  may  be  passed  independently  of  it.  Give'  10
to  60  drops  of  liquid  extract  of  ergot  every  four  hours,  and  if  the  urinary
passage  is  the  seat  of  the  injury,  inject  a  weak  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid.
The  food  should  consist  for  a  time  of  Bovine  or  beef  tea,  with  egg  and
milk    to    drink.      Under   no    circumstances    administer   a    diuretic.
Hepatitis    (Inflammation    of   the   Liver). — See    Jaundice.
Hernia,  Umbilical. — See  Navel  Hernia.
Hiccough  arises  from  indigestion,  and  often  annoys  house  pets  that
are  given  improper  food,  such  as  sweets,  etc.  A  wineglassful  of  lime  wa-
ter in  a  tumbler  of  milk  to  drink,  and  for  a  20  lb.  dog  10  grains  of  bicar-
bonate of  soda,  and  10  drops  of  sal  volatile  in  a  tablespoonful  of  milk,  will
usually  prove  effectual.  Another  remedy  I  have  used  is  camplior  water
(not  spirits).  Give  a  20  to  40  lb.  dog  a  teaspoonful  and  repeat  in  five
minutes.
Husk. — Dogs  are  subject  to  a  dry,  husky  cough,  associated  with  de-
rangement of  the  stomach,  and  worms  are  often  the  originating  cause.
The  symptoms  are  dry.  hot  nose,  disagreeable  breath,  inflamed  eye,  and
increased  discharge  from  nose,  with  more  or  less  general  fever;  the  dog
after  coughing  retches,  bringing  up  portions  of  frothy  mucus.  The  treat-
ment consists  in  keeping  the  dog  free  from  damp  and  cold,'  feeding  on
warm,  easily  digested  food,  and  the  administration  of  a  dose  of  salad  oil
every  third  morning,  and  the  following  two  sets  of  pills,  two  a  day  of  each,
giving  alternately:
Pills  for  Husky  Cough. — Powdered  opium,  6  grains;  tartarised  anti-
mony, 1  grain;  compound  squill  pill,  1  dram;  mix  and  divide  into  twenty-
four  pills,  and  give  one  to  a  20  lb.  dog  twice  a  day.
Tonic  Stomachic  Pills. — Pure  Sulphate  of  iron,  12  grains;  dried  bicar-
bonate of  soda,  24  grains;  extract  of  camomile,  24  grains;  mix  and  divide
into  twelve  pills.  One  of  these  is  a  dose  for  a  20  lb.  dog.  Not  infrequently
worms  in  the  stomach  will  cause  husk;  if  so,  a  full  dose  of  ipecacuanha  wine
to  cause  vomiting  should  be  given.
As  I  am  writing  I  have  just  had  such  a  case  of  a  dry,  hard  and  in-
cessant cough  in  an  eight-months-old  bull  terrier  pup,  which  cough  sud-
denly appeared  without  any  apparent  cause,  the  dog  acting  and  seeming
well,  only  for  this  dry,  hard  cough.     She  had  been  fully,  as  I  supposed  at
the  time,  treated  for  worms,  and  thought  she  was  rid  of  them,  but  could
not  account  for  the  cough.  I  was  ou  the  lookout  and  seen  her  have  a
passage  of  a  bloody  and  mucous  nature.  Toward  night  I  concluded  it
might  be  worms,  gave  her  a  dose  of  Sergeant's  Sure  Shot  after  she  had
fasted  from  breakfast  till  supper  time,  and  the  result  was — finding  several
small  thread  worms  in  her  passage  after  the  vermifuge  had  worked,  and
here  was  the  cause  of  the  dry,  hard  cough.  I  followed  this  up  the  next
morning  with  a  second  dose  of  "Sure  Shot,"  got  more  thread  worms,  and
the  bitch  feeling  much  better,  wanting  to  eat,  and  her  cough  very  much
better.  She  fully  recovered.  All  this  goes  to  show  that  you  must  get
rid  of  the  Worms — as  they  are  the  cause  of  more  trouble  to  dogs  than  from
any  other  cause  or  a  combined  lot  of  causes,  you  may  as  truthfully  say.
Honie  Sickness. — This  is  often  seen  in  dogs  which,  from  some  causa
or  other,  have  to  leave  their  home  and  friends,  and  reside  for  a  time  in  a
hospital.  It  therefore  behooves  every  one  who  has  charge  of  such  dogs  to
make  them  comfortable,  and  treat  them  as  nearly  as  possible,  consistent
with  rational  and  medical  treatment,  as  they  would  be  at  home.  It  is
absolutely  cruel  to  place  a  nervous  and  highly  sensitive  pet  dog  in  a  kennel
surrounded  by  other  dogs  which  are  continually  barking,  or  to  give  them
over  entirely  to  an  attendant,  which  is  too  frequently  done  in  hospitals,
the  owner  of  the  establishment,  or  the  veterinary  surgeon,  only  attending
at  intervals.  All  pets  should  be  taken  into  the  house,  or  have  a  special
place  set  apart  for  them,  where  they  can  receive  personal  attention  and  have
their  small  comforts  attended  to.
Very  much  the  best  plan  is  to  not  send  your  pet  to  any  veterinary
hospital,  but  to  keep  it  home  where  it  will  much  better  endure  the  ordeal
it  may  have  to  go  through,  and  have  the  surgeon  come  there  to  treat  it.