where  the  mongrels  come  from.  There  ought  to  be  a  law  in  every  state

that  when  a  female  is  in  season,  she  must  be  kept  confined  till  over  it,  or,

a  penalty  of  a  fine  of  twenty-five  dollars,  for  here  is  where  these  "curs"

come  from.  If  you  see  or  meet  one  of  these  poor  "unfortunates,"  if  you

can't  give  him  a  home  yourself,  try  to  get  some  friend  to  take  the  dog  and

give  it  the  home  any  and  every  dog  deserves.

Twenty-two  thousand  of  my  former  two  editions  of  this  book  were  sold,

a  wonderful  record,  beating  the  combined  sales  of  all  the  other  dog  books

ever  published,  and  I  only  wish  it  were  possible  to  publish  the  thousands  of

letters  I  have  received  unsolicited — for  they  have  made  my  heart  glad —

often — when  it  needed  it  too.

You  can't  do  too  much  for  dogs,  and  all  you  do  for  them  they  will  re-

pay you  a  hundred  fold.

When  you  get  a  dog,  arrange  to  care  for  it  properly;  provide  a  suitable

place  for  it  to  live  and  sleep,  and  especially  see  to  it  that  your  dog  gets

plenty  of  exercise,  which  is  as  essentially  necessary  as  food  and  water  to

keep  it  in  health.

When  you  take  your  dog  for  a  walk,  teach  him  to  mind  you;  if  he

runs  too  far  ahead,  call  him  back,  and  never  allow  him  to  cross  over  the

street  ahead  of  you,  as  any  dog  is  liable  to  do  should  he  see  another  dog  on

the  other  side.  A  dog's  judgment  is  faulty  as  to  how  quick  he  can  get  over  .

In  front  of  a  car  coming,  and  when  he  sees  the  other  dog  he  forgets  all

this  and  doesn't  see  or  hear  the  electric  car  or  auto  that  is  rapidly  coming  up

or  down  the  street.  Many  a  dog  has  been  killed  this  way,  even  when  out

with  his  master  or  mistress,  because  they  were  not  watching  out  for  their

dog.  When  you  come  to  a  street  crossing,  look  and  see  if  any  car  is  coming;

stop  a  second,  see  that  your  dog  is  behind  you  and  that  it  stops;  then,  if

the  coast  is  clear  say  "All  right,  come  on,  Jack!"  Your  dog  can  soon  be

taught  to  follow  and  mind  you.  The  writer  has  for  years  past  taken  out

from  fifteen  to  twenty  dogs  at  a  time  every  afternoon  for  a  walk  on  the

streets  of  Cincinnati,  and  all  under  such  control  that  by  the  crack  of  a  whip

they  would  all  stop  at  a  crossing,  and  a  second  crack  and  say  "Go!"  over

they  flew,  and  enjoyed  it,  too.  With  only  one  dog  for  a  walk  no  danger  need

ever  befall  him  if  you  are  watching  out  for  him  as  you  should  do.

If  your  dog  gets  into  the  bad  habit  of  running  and  barking  at  a  horse,

bicycle  or  a  person,  break  him  of  this  at  once  by  calling  him  to  you  there

and  then;  scold  him  and  switch  him  sharply  over  his  back — any  dog  can

soon  be  broken  of  this  by  proper  punishment  at  the  time,  or  of  any  fault

if  he  is  punished  and  knows  what  it  is  for.  Whipping  a  dog  after  the

fault  does  no  good  and  is  only  an  unnecessary  infliction.  Whipping  is  not

necessarily  cruelty  any  more  than  it  would  be  to  punish  your  child  when

it  needed  it,  and  children  need  it  oftener  than  dogs  do.  Get  a  rawhide,  keep

it  handy,  and  when  your  dog  needs  it  give  him  a  few  sharp  cuts  across  the

rump  or  back,  which  will  smart  and  sting,  and  he'll  remember  it.  Never

strike  him  over  the  head  or  kick  him,  which  is  brutal.  Don't  get  angry

yourself,  keep  cool,  for  the  dog  can  notice  this  the  same  as  your  child  could,

and  the  punishment  loses  its  effect.  Your  dog  loves  you  from  the  first  hour

you  have  him,  and  he'll  love  you  none  the  less  for  a  deserved  punishment.

Whipping  is  not  necessary  with  all  dogs,  scolding  answering  the  pur-

pose in  many  cases.  Dogs  possess  so  much  intelligence  that  a  good  scolding,

especially  in  older  ones,  will  do  just  as  well,  and  I  consider  it  preferable.

I  have  dogs  now  that  act  heart-broken  when  I  scold  them  and  continue  so

till  I  again  talk  to  them  and  "make  up"  by  saying,  "Don't  you  know,  Jack,

that  you  were  a  very  bad  dog?"  and.  "Now  if  you'll  be  good  I'll  forgive  you,

but  you  mustn't  do  so  any  more."     Then  see  how  happy  Jack  is  and  how  he'll

jump  all  over  you  for  joy.

You  can  reason  with  all  dogs.  The  "punishment  should  fit  the  crime,"

and  therefore  use  judgment.  When  your  dog  deserves  praise,  don't  be

stingy  about  giving  it,  but  talk  to  him;  he'll  understand  your  words  and

oaresses,  and  by  his  actions,  the  loving  looks  from  his  eyes  and  the  wag  of

his  tail,  he'll  show  you  how  much  he  appreciates  it.

As  to  giving  sulphur  to  dogs,  this  is  an  old  tradition  handed  down

from  no  one  knows  where,  and  here  is  where  many  dog  owners  make  a

mistake.  If  your  dog  gets  sick  your  neighbor  will  say:  "Oh,  give  it  some

sulphur."  Whoever  invented  this  idea  knew  very  little  about  dogs.  Sul-

phur in  its  place  is  all  right,  but  a  continual  use  of  it  to  excess  thins  the

blood,  weakens  the  dog,  and  does  harm  far  more  than  good.  Many  a  poor

dog  has  been  overdosed  with  sulphur  when  it  did  not  need  it  at  all.  I've

heard  of  people  keeping  a  lump  of  sulphur  in  the  dog's  drinking  pan,  and

in  this  case  it  did  no  harm  nor  any  good,  for  you  can  leave  a  lump  of  it

in  water  for  ten  years  and  the  dog  never  gets  any  of  it,  because  sulphur  and

water  do  not  mix,  and  it  only  serves  to  give  the  water  a  nasty  taste  in  the

imagination  of  the  dog.  Sulphur  given  about  once  a  month  in  summer  is

all  right  for  grown  dogs;  the  proper  dose  being  for  large  breeds,  a  good

teaspoonful  of  flour  of  sulphur  smoothly  mixed  in  milk,  to  be  given  before

breakfast;  an  even  teaspoonful  for  smaller  breeds.  It  can  also  be  given

mixed  up  in  molasses,  which  will,  however,  act  more  quickly  as  a  physic.

If  you  live  in  a  flat,  or  have  no  yard  so  the  dog  can  get  grass,  you  can

plant  some  grass  seed  in  a  box  and  have  it  all  the  year  around  for  your  dog

to  eat.  Get  the  seed  of  the  kind  of  grass  that  dogs  like — any  seed  store

has  it — and  you  can  just  as  well  raise  and  keep  grass  for  your  dog  as  you

can  raise  flowers  indoors.  Keep  box  sitting  on  floor  so  dog  can  go  to  it  when

he  wants  to.     You  provide  the  grass,  and  he'll  do  the  rest.

This  preface  or  introductory,  is  about  all  I  can  say — it  seems  to  me  it

has  covered  the  subject,  but  read  all  the  rest  in  the  book,  under  the  several

headings,  so  you  don't  miss  anything  of  all  the  good  things  this  book  con-

tains.

So  I'll  close,  by  dedicating  the  book  to  dogs,  and  their  owners.

Faithfully  yours,

AL.  G.  EBERHART.