Medical  Journal,  says:  "M.  Pasteur  does  not  cure  hydrophobia — he  gives
it!"  A  physician  describes  the  system  as  the  "inoculating  usually  wholly
uncontaminated  human  beings  with  the  most  terrible  virus  known  to  science
— to-wit,  that  of  hydrophobia."
"The  Pasteur  advocates  admit  that  only  from  5  to  10  per  cent  of  per-
sons bitten  by  a  rabid  animal  ever  have  hydrophobia,  with  no  treatment
whatever.  The  writer  of  this  article  has  been  bitten  several  times,  and
would  never  allow  the  wound  to  be  cauterized.
"Even  if  there  be  such  a  disease  as  hydrophobia  in  man,  which  is
probably  blood  poisoning  (  a  thorn  of  a  rose,  the  prick  of  a  pin,  the  scratch
of  a  baby's  finger  nail,  the  point  of  a  lead  pencil  stuck  behind  the  ear,  the
cut  on  the  neck  of  a  stiff  linen  collar  have  all  produced  blood  poisoning),
and  if  there  be  such  a  disease  as  rabies  in  a  dog,  which  is  probably  dis-
temper or  epilepsy,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  found  among  the  homeless  or
unlicensed  dogs,  or  those  that  roam  the  streets,  which  are  the  ones  killed
from   the  cruel   supposition    that   they  especially  are   dangerous.
"Dr.  Matthew  Woods,  of  Philadelphia,  says:  'At  the  Philadelphia  dog
pound,  where,  on  an  average,  over  6,000  vagrant  dogs  are  taken  up  an-
nually, and  where  the  catchers  and  helpers  are  frequently  bitten,  not  one
case  of  hydrophobia  has  occurred  during  its  entire  history  of  2  5  years,  in
which  time  150,000  dogs  have  been  handled.'
"At  the  dog  shelter  in  New  York  City  the  Superintendent  told  me  he
had  been  bitten  over  a  hundred  times  and  paid  no  attention  to  it  what-
ever. In  killing  50,000  unlicensed  dogs  each  year,  to  the  great  shame  of  an
indifferent  money-getting  city,  New  York  has  not  found  one  case  of  rabies.
London,   Eng.,    kills   nearly   the   same   number,    and   has   not   seen   a   case
among  its  unlicensed  clogs.  Among  the  thousands  of  dogs  killed  after  the
brutal  muzzling  order  in  Washington,  n.  C,  last  year  not  one  case  of  rabies
was  found.  Let  the  poor  people  keep  dogs.  They  are  good  companions  for
their  children,  and  do  not  lead  to  the  workhouse  or  the  jail.  They  are  the
best  guard  for  our  houses  where  there  are  no  police;  indeed  cheaper  than
policemen,  and  usually  more  easily  found  when  wanted.  We  spend  money
to  give  playgrounds  and  entertainments  for  children,  and  that  Is  well,  but
their  dogs  give  them  more  comfort,  usually,  than  almost  any  other  one
thing,  as  boys  and  girls  will  universally  testify.
"Let  the  dogs  live.  The  cars  will  necessarily  kill  some.  They  are  not
long  lived  at  the  best.  They  give  us  devotion,  companionship,  and  ought
to  make  us  kinder  and  more  gentle,  from  their  helplessness  and  dependence
upon  us.  They  are  good  friends,  to  some  very  unfeeling  people.  Do  not
chain  them  up.  Repeal  our  cruel  laws.  Let  us,  a  professedly  Christian  city,
be  as  humane  as  the  unchristian  Turk,  or  the  worshipers  of  Buddha  in
India.  Let  us  honor  ourselves  by  doing  justice  to  the  speechless.  Let  the
dogs  live."
Here  I  give  a  cure  for  hydrophobia,  a  clipping,  from  a  paper:
"The  time  between  the  biting  of  an  animal  by  a  mad  dog  and  the  show-
ing signs  of  hydrophobia  is  not  less  than  nine  days,  but  may  be  nine  months.
After  the  animal  has  become  rabid  the  scratch  of  a  tooth  upon  a  person  or
slobber  coming  in  contact  with  a  sore,  or  raw  place,  will  produce  hydropho-
bia just  the  same  as  if  bitten  by  a  mad  dog.
"Hydrophob'a  can  be  prevented,  and  I  will  give  what  is  known  to  be
an  infallible  remedy  for  man  and  beast  if  properly  administered.  A  dose
for  a  horse  or  cow  should  be  four  times  as  much  as  for  a  person.  It  is
not  too  late  to  give  the  medicine  any  time  before  the  spasms  come  on.
The  dose  for  a  person  is  one  and  one-half  ounces  of  elecamnane  root  bruised,
put  in  a  pint  of  new  milk,  reduced  one-half  by  boil'ng;  take  all  at  once  in
the  morning,  fasting  until  the  afternoon,  or  at  least  a  very  light  diet  until
several  hours  are  passed.  The  second  dose  same  as  first,  except  take  two
ounces  of  the  root.  The  third  same  as  the  second.  Three  doses  are  all
that  are  needed  and  there  need  be  no  fear,  as  I  know  from  my  own  experi-
ence, and  know  of  numbers  of  cases  where  it  was  entirely  successful.  This
is  no  guesswork.  The  persons  alluded  to  had  been  bitten  by  their  own  dogs,
which  were  then  tied  up  to  see  if  they  were  really  mad.  They  proved  to  be
mad  and  the  remedy  was  successful.  A  physician  told  me  he  had  known
of  the  use  of  this  remedy  for  over  thirty  years  and  never  knew  it  to  fail
when  properly  administered.  He  related  a  case  where  a  number  of  cows
were  bitten,  and  penned  half  in  one  pen  and  half  in  another;  to  half  the
remedy  was  given  and  were  saved.     The  other  half  died  from  hydrophobia."
Let  us  not  become  insane  on  the  hydrophobia  question.  Let  the  dogs
have  plenty  of  water,  don't  tie  them  up  in  hot  weather,  and  don't  make  the
poor  animals  chase  for  miles  after  a  bicycle,  carriage  or  electric  car  on  a  hot
•and  dusty  road.  If  there  is  a  spectacle  humiliating  to  those  who  wish  to
respect  their  fellow  man.  it  is  the  sight  of  a  dog,  in  the  last  stages  of  ex-
haustion, struggling  to  keep  up  with  some  vehicle  upon  which  his  selfish
master  is  taking  his  ease,  unmindful   of  ils  misery.
The  following  article  was  written  by  D.  E.  Salmon,  D.  V.  M.,  Chief  of
the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry,  in  the  Yearbook  of  the  Department  of
Agriculture,  issued  at  Washington,  D.  C,  and  as  will  be  seen,  he  is  a  firm
believer  in  rabies.  I  reproduce  it  as  authority  from  the  other  side  of  the
question.
This  is  the  concluding  speech  to  the  jury  by  the  "Prosecuting  Attorney,"
whose  duty  it  is  to  always  find  the  prisoner  guilty:
"The  symptoms  of  rabies  are  such  as  we  should  expect  from  serious
disease  of  the  central  organs  of  the  nervous  system:  F'rsr,  Irritation;  sec-
ond, paralysis  and  death.  The  rabies  virus  appears  to  have  little  effect  upon
the  system  until  it  reaches  the  brain  and  spinal  cord.  There  it  multiplies,
sets  up  irritation,  and  finally  interrupts  the  functions.
"Rabies  is  generally  divided  into  two  forms:  First,  furious  rabies;
second,  dumb  rabies.     In  the  former  the  animal  is  irritable,  aggressive,  and
bites  nearly  every  object  which  comes  its  way;  in  the  latter  the  muscles  of
its  jaw  are  paralyzed  almost  from  the  first  appearance  of  symptoms,  and
being  unable  to  bite,  the  animal  remains  more  quiet  and  tranquil.  Essen-
tilly  the.  two  forms  of  the  disease  are  the  same,  but  owing  to  the  parts
of  the  brain  attacked  and  the  acuteness  of  the  attack,  paralysis  appears
much  sooner  in  one  of  these  forms  than  in  the  other.  The  saliva  from  a
case  of  dumb  rabies  is  just  as  dangerous  and  virulent  as  that  from  a  case
of  furious  rabies.  The  dogs  with  dumb  rabies  are  less  dangerous  simply
because  they  are  unable  to  bite  and  thus  insert  their  saliva  into  a  wound.
"The  impression  should  not  be  formed  that  dumb  rabies  and  furious
rabies  always  represent  two  distinct  types  of  disease,  and  that  one  may  at
a  glance  classify  every  case  as  belonging  to  one  or  the  other  of  these  types.
Quite  the  contrary.  The  typical  cases  belong  to  the  two  extremes  of  symp-
toms, and  there  are  all  graduations  between  the  two.  In  fact,  almost  every
case  of  furious  rabies  sooner  or  later  change  into  the  dumb  form,  that  is,
the  final  stage  of  rabies  is  almost  invariably  paralytic,  and  the  dumb  form
in  its  typical  development  occurs  when  the  paralysis  appears  on  the  first  day
of  the  disease.  The  paralysis  may  not  appear,  however,  until  the  second,
or  third,  or  some  subsequent  day.
"Again  ,a  dog  does  not  necessarily  bite  everything  about  it  even  though
it  has  rabies  and  its  jaws  are  not  paralyzed.  It  may  be  combative  and
furious  all  of  the  time,  or  only  a  part  of  the  time,  or  not  at  all.  There  is
no  disease  in  which  the  symptoms  vary  more  than  in  rabies  of  the  dog,
and  it  is,  consequently,  impossible  in  any  description  of  moderate  length
to  give  an  idea  of  the  different  forms  under  which  it  may  appear.
Furious  Rabies.
"Fleming  has  well  said  that  it  is  a  great  and  dangerous  error  to  sup-
pose that  the  disease  commences  with  signs  of  raging  madness,  and  that
the  earliest  phase  of  the  malady  is  ushered  in  with  fury  and  destruction.
The  symptoms  appear  very  gradually,  and  at  first  there  is  only  the  slightest
evidence  of  brain  disease.  The  animal's  habits  and  behavior  are  changed.
It  may  be  more  restless  and  affectionate  than  usual,  seeking  to  be  near  its
master  or  mistress,  fawning,  licking  the  hands  or  face",  and  apparently  seek-
ing for  sympathy  or  assistance.  Such  caresses  are,  however,  extremely
dangerous,  for  the  animal's  tongue,  moist  with  virulent  saliva,  coming  in
contact  with  a  part  where  the  skin  is  thin,  abraded,  or  wounded,  may  fatally
infect  the  person  with  whom  it  is  endeavoring  to  demonstrate  its  affection.
The  smallest  abrasion  may  be,  as  Bouley  has  impressively  said,  a  door
opened  to  death;  and  such  a  death!  The  instances  in  which  hydrophobia
has  developed  from  such  inoculations  are  very  numerous,  and  everyone
should  be  warned  against  this  kiss  of  affection,  which  carries  with  it  not
only  death,  but  sufferings  which  are  far  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  fatal  .
termination.
"In  most  cases  dogs  first  become  dull,  gloomy,  morose,  taciturn,  seek-
ing solitude  and  isolation  in  out-oMhe-way  places,  or  retiring  under  pieces
of  furniture.  But  in  this  retirement  they  can  not  rest;  they  are  uneasy
and  agitated;  they  lie  down  and  assume  the  attitude  of  repose,  but  in  a
few  minutes  are  up  again,  walking  hither  and  thither,  'seeking  rest,  but
finding  none.'  Occasionally  this  restlessness  may  disappear  for  a  time,  and
the  animal  become  lively  and  affectionate;  oftener  it  sinks  into  a  sullen
gloominess,  from  which  even  its  master's  voice  rouses  it  but  temporarily.
It  becomes  more  and  more  desperate  in  its  efforts  to  prepare  a  comfortable
bed,  pawing  or  scattering  the  straw,  or,  if  in  a  house,  scratching,  tumbling
and  tearing  cushions,  rugs,  curtains,  carpets  and  everything  of  that  kind
within  its  reach.
"At  this  period  dogs  may  have  aberrations  of  the  senses,  of  the  sight,
hearing,  and  feeling,  which  cause  hallucinations  and  lead  them  to  think
that  they  are  being  annoyed  by  something,  or  that  some  animal  or  person
is  endeavoring  to  injure  them.     They  crouch,  ready  to  spring  upon  an  ene-
my;  they  rush  forward  and  snap  at  the  air;  they  throw  theselves,  howling
and   furious,  against  a  wall,  as  though  they  heard  sounds  beyond   it.
"While  at  first  the  affected  dog  may  not  be  disposed  to  bite,  it  be-
comes more  dangerous  as  his  hallucinations  and  delirium  increase.  The
voice  of  the  master  or  of  an  acquaintance  may  dispel  the  aberrations  tem-
porarily and  lead  him  to  friendly  demonstrations,  but  an  unexpected  move-
ment or  touch  may  bring  on  another  access  and  lead  to  a  quick  and  un-
expected bite.
"The  disturbance  of  the  sensations  leads  to  chills  and  itching.  If  the
place  where  the  bite  occurred  is  accessible  the  dog  licks  the  scar,  and
later  bites  and  tears  the  tissues.  This  tearing  of  the  flesh  is  not  always
confined  to  the  site  of  the  inoculation,  but  certain  regions  of  the  body
appear  to  lose  their  sensitiveness,  and  at  the  same  time  to  convey  to  the
brain  the  sensation  of  itching.  The  animal  in  this  case  bites  into  its  own
flesh   with  apparent  pleasure  and   satisfaction.
Such  animals  take  food  until  the  disease  is  considerably  advanced,
if  it  is  something  which  can  be  swallowed  without  mastication;  other-
wise it  is  dropped  after  remaining  a  short  time  in  the  mouth.
"Difficulty  in  swallowing  is  an  early  symptom,  and  frequently  leads
the  unsuspecting  owner  to  conclude  that  the  animal  has  a  bone  in  his
throat.  A  dog  which  appears  to  have  a  bone  in  his  throat  is  on  general
principles  one  of  the  most  dangerous  animals  in  existence.  The  supposed
bone  may  be  there,  but  on  the  other  hand  the  symptoms  which  lead  to  this
supposition  may  be  due  to  partial  paralysis  caused  by  rabies,  and  the  owner
may  be  inoculated  with  the  virulent  saliva  while  thrusting  his  finger  or
hand  in  the  dog's  mouth  to  discover  a  bone  which  has  no  existence  but  in
his   imagination.
"It  is  commonly  believed  that  mad  dogs  have  fear  of  water  and  are
unable  to  drink,  but  there  could  be  no  greater  mistake.  In  this  respect  they
differ  entirely  from  the  human  patient.  They  have  no  fear  or  dread  of
water,  but  continue  to  drink  until  paralysis  has  progressed  so  far  that
they  are  no  longer  able  to  swallow.  The  fact  that  a  suspected  dog  is
seen  to  drink  or  to  wade  into  a  stream  is  consequently  no  evidence  that
he  is  not  mad.
"When  the  furious  symptoms  come  on,  the  dog  leaves  his  home  and
goes  upon  a  long  chase,  with  no  apparent  object  in  view  other  than  to  be
traveling  onward.  He  trots  at  a  rapid  pace,  eye  haggard,  tail  depressed,
indifferent  to  his  surroundings.  He  flies  at  and  bites  dogs  and  persons
whom  he  meets,  but  usually  does  not  apparently  search  for  them,  or  even
notice  them  if  they  remain  quiet.  Dogs  in  this  condition  may  travel  many
miles,  and  finally  drop  from  exhaustion  and  die.  Often  after  an  absence
of  a  day  or  two  they  return  to  their  home,  exhausted,  emaciated,  covered
with  dust  and  blood,  and  presenting  a  most  forlorn  and  miserable  appear-
ance. Those  who  have  pity  for  such  an  animal  and  try  to  make  it  clean
and  comfortable,  are  in  great  danger  of  being  bitten,  for  the  disease  has
advanced  to  a  point  where  the  delirium  or  insanity  is  most  marked,  and
where  a  treacherous  bite  is  most  common.  Doubtless  the  clog  has  no  in-
tention of  injuring  a  friend,  and  would  not  do  so  did  he  net  see  that
friend  transformed  by  his  disordered  vision  into  some  distorted  and  un-
recognizable shape,  which  he  thinks  is  about  to  injure  him.  But  while
we  may  give  the  dog  due  credit  for  not  intentionally  and  deliberately
inoculating  his  friends  with  his  fatal  virus,  let  us  not  forget  that  the
inoculation  is  no  less  deadly  because  it  is  the  result  of  the  abnormal  working
of  a  disordered  mind.  Whatever  the  sentiment  may  be  which  leads  the  dog
to  turn  upon  his  master  or  mistress  and  inflict  an  injury,  the  duty  remains
the  same  for  the  owner  to  take  due  precautions  to  prevent  such  an  oc-
currence.
"If  the  animal,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  escape,  is  kept  confined,
the  paroxysms  of  fury  are  seen  to  occur  intermittently,  or,  in  the  absence
of  provacation,  they  may  be  entirely  wanting.  If  excited,  it  howls,  rushes
upon  objects  that  are  thrust  toward  it,  or  throws  itself  against  the  bars  of
its  cage  and  bites  with  great  fury.
"As  death  approaches,  the  animal  becomes  exhausted  and  scarcely
able  to  stand;  the  eyes  are  dull  and  sunken,  and  the  expression  is  that  of
pain  and  despair.  Paralysis  appears  in  the  jaws  or  in  the  posterior  ex-
tremities and  extends  rapidly  to  other  parts  of  the  body.  The  animal,  be-
ing unable  to  stand,  lies  extended  upon  its  side;  the  respiration  becomes
more  and  more  difficult;  there  are  spasmodic  contractions  of  certain  groups
of  muscles,  complete  prostration,  and  death.
"The  ordinary  course  of  the  disease  is  four  or  five  days;  it  may  be
as  short  as  two  or  as  long  as  ten  days.
Dumb  Rabies.
"When  this  form  of  the  disease  is  typical,  it  comes  on  with  restless-
ness, depression,  a  tendency  to  lick  objects,  and.  paralysis  of  the  muscles,
which  close  the  jaws.  As  a  consequence  of  the  paralysis,  the  lower  jaw
drops,  the  animal  is  unable  to  close  the  mouth,  the  tongue  hangs  out,  and
an  abundance  of  saliva  escapes.  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  be-
comes dry,  discolored,  and  covered  with  dust.  The  animal  remains  quiet,
does  not  respond  to  provocations,  and  appears  to  understand  its  helpless-
ness.    As  Bouley  has  said,  the  animal  cannot  bite  and  does  not  desire  to  bite.
"When  dumb  rabies  follows  a  period  in  which  the  animal  has  been
affected  with  the  furious  form,  the  desire  and  tendency  to  bite  may  be"
retaine  deven  after  the  jaw  is  paralyzed.
"The  course  of  the  disease  is  short,  death  usually  occurring  in  from
two  to  four  days.
"The  dumb  form  of  rabies  is  very  common,  and  many  persons  know
it  as  'drop  jaw'  who  have  no  idea  of  its  true  nature.
"Many  of  the  common  mistakes  with  reference  to  rabies  arise  from
an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  symptoms.  It  is  on  this  point  that  there
is  greatest  need  of  educational  work.  Bouley  has  most  earnestly  warned
us  to  'distrust. a  dog  when  it  shows  signs  of  illness;  every  sick  dog  should
as  a  rule  be  suspected;  more  particularly  distrust  a  dog  when  it  be-
comes dull,  morose  and  seeks  for  solitude,  which  appears  not  to  know
where  to  rest,  which  is  always  on  the  move,  prowling,  snapping  at  the
air,  and  suddenly  barking  at  nothing  when  all  around  is  perfectly  still,
whose  countenance  is  somber,  and  only  assumes  its  usual  animated  ex-
pression by  brief  starts;  beware  of  the  dog  that  seeks  and  scrapes  inces-
santly, and  exhibits  aggressive  movements  against  phantoms;  and,  finally,
beware,  above  all,  of  the  dog  which  has  become  too  fond  of  you,  and  is
continually  endeavoring  to  lick  the  hands  or  face."
The  Period  of  Incubation  of  Rabies.
The  period  of  incubation  of  a  contagious  disease  is  the  time  which
elapses  between  the  inoculation  or  exposure  and  the  appearance  of  the  first
symptoms.  With  rabies  this  period  varies  remarkably.  It  may  be  as  short
as  six  or  seven  days,  and  it  occasionally  exceeds  one  hundred  days.  In
rare  cases  it  has  been  reported  on  good  authority  that  a  year,  or  even
fourteen  months,  elapsed  between  the  time  the  animal  was  bitten  and  the
time  when  the  disease  manifested  itself.  The  majority  of  cases  develop
in  from  three  to  seven  weeks.
During  the  greater  part  of  the  period  of  incubation  the  infected  animal
is  healthy,  and  would  not  cause  disease  in  any  animal  or  person  which  it
bites.  The  saliva  may  become  virulent,  however,  two  or  three  days  before
the  appearance  of  the  first  symptoms,  and  any  animal  or  person  bitten  after
the  contagion  has  contaminated  the  saliva  is,  of  course,  liable  to  contract
the  disease.
There  is  a  very  erroneous  and  rather  stupid  belief,  quite  common,  to
the  effect  that  if  a  dog  bites  a  person  and  becomes  mad  at  any  time
thereafter  the  person  so  bitten  will  contract  hydrophobia.  This  fallacy
may  have  arisen   from  some  Instance  In  which  a  person  had   been  bitten
within  a  few  days  of  the  appearance  of  the  symptoms  of  disease  in  the
dog,  and  when  the  saliva  was  already  virulent.  However  this  may  be,
it  is  perfectly  certain  that  a  dog  can  not  convey  this  disease  when  he
does  not  have  it  or  before  he  has  himself  contracted  it.  If,  therefore,  a
dog  does  not  show  symptoms  of  rabies  within  a  week  from  the  time  the
bite  is  inflicted  there  is  no  danger  of  the  person  contracting  the  disease.
The  only  possibility  of  an  exception  to  this  rule  is  the  very  doubtful  one,
that  in  extremely  rare  instances  a  dog  may  have  rabies  and  recover  from
it  without  showing  characteristic  symptoms.  A  very  few  cases  of  this
kind  have  been  observed  among  dogs  artificially  inoculated,  but  it  has
not  yet  been  shown  that  their  saliva  became  virulent,  or  that  similar  cases
occur  under  natural  conditions.  The  fact  remains,  however,  that  a  person
is  in  no  danger  of  contracting  rabies  because  a  healthy  dog  has  bitten  him,
which   dog   is   afterward   inoculated    with   rabies."
The  following — that  I  found  in  some  paper,  is  too  good  to  leave  out
of  this  book:
"It  is  a  pleasure  to  note  that  Superintendent  Frael  of  the  New  York
Department  of  Health  comes  out  flat-footed  regarding  the  extreme  rarity
of  rabies,  asserting  that  what  people  suffer  from  is  false  or  pseudo  rabies
brought  about  by  scare.  He  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  during  the
life  of  the  New  York  Society  for  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals,  which
was  started  in  1894,  no  less  than  three  millions  of  dogs  and  cats  have  been
handled.  That  the  employes  engaged  in  the  work  of  collecting  the  strays
number  about  thirty,  and  on  an  average  everyone  of  them  is  bitten  four
times  every  month,  or  fifty  times  a  year,  and  that  some  of  the  dogs'  were
subsequently  declared  by  the  local  authorities  to  be  rabid.  On  this  basis
of  computation  there  has  been  thirty  thousand  bites  by  all  sorts  of  ani-
mals and  one  hundred  and  fifty  different  men  have  been  employed  during
the  twenty  years,  yet  not  a  single  case  of  hydrophobia  has  resulted,  all  that
the  men   did  being   to  cleanse  the  wound  thoroughly  and  have  it  dresseu.
Of  course,  we  clog  people,  those  of  us  who  have  had  the  greatest  ex-
perience Avith  dogs,  have  always  held  similar  views,  and  your  correspon-
dent's very  simple  remedy  has  for  years  been  to  turn  the  water  faucet  on
the  wound,  so  as  to  thoroughly  cleanse  it,  and  while  this  is  being  done,