ing the  ear  daily  with  1  part  of  spirits  of  wine  and  20  parts  of  warm  water,
afterwards  drying  the  ear  thoroughly,  by  means  of  a  piece  of  wool  rolled
upon  a  probe  or  pointed  piece  of  stick.  Several  fresh  pieces  of  wool  will  be
necessary.     Canker  is  also  a  fruitful  cause  of  deafness.
I  know  of  no  treatment  for  congenital  deafness  likely  to  be  of  any
use  except  when  it  is  caused  by  a  morbid  growth  capable  of  being  removed.
Among  other  causes  producing  deafness,  blows  may  be  mentioned;  also
lugging  at  the  ear — a  most  brutal  mode  of  punishment  often  resorted  to
by  keepers  and  those  having  the  care  of  sporting  field  dogs — and  the  lodg-
ment of  water  in  the  ear  cavity.  In  the  latter  case,  pouring  in  a  little  pure
oil  of  sweet  almonds  may  give  relief;  and  in  the  other  cases  the  treatment
recommended  for  internal  canker  may  be  beneficially  followed  with,  in
addition,  the  application  of  a  blister  behind  the  ears.  Whilst  the  dog  is
under  treatment,  cooling,  aperient  medicine  should  be  given,  and  a  light
diet  with  green  vegetables  adopted.  You  will  find  that  dogs  born  deaf,
like  a  deaf  and  dumb  person,  have  their  other  senses  quickened,  and  the
dog  will  be  remarkably  sharp  at  interpreting  signs  given  by  the  master,
who  should  adopt  a  system  of  signs  and  keep  to  them.  If  you  own  a  deaf
dog,  you  should  have  an  enclosed  yard  for  him  so  no  danger  of  his  getting
out  on  the  street  and  hurt  or  killed  by  a  passing  wagon  or  street  car —
and  remember,  if  you  have  him  out  for  a  walk,  that  he  is  deaf,  so  that  no
harm  befalls  him;  you  do  the  watching  out  in  this  case.  Deafness  does
not  transmit — simply  happens — so  that  a  deaf  bitch  will  be  just  as  good
to  use  for  breeding  purposes.  ■
Epilepsy. — Dogs  are  peculiarly  liable  to  this  trouble.  The  symptoms
are  sudden  loss  of  sensation,  a  violent  convulsive  action  of  the  muscles,
both  of  the  body  and  limbs,  champing  of  the  jaws  and  emission  of  froth
from  the  mouth,  the  tongue  may  get  cut  by  the  involuntary  action  of  the
jaw  and  being  tinged  with  blood  adds  to  the  fears  of  those  ignorant  of
the  disease,  and  from  this  unfounded  alarm  the  dog  may  be  supposed  to
be  mad  (?)  and  the  poor  fellow  killed.  See  treatment  under  head  of
Epileptic  Fits.
Eye,  Diseases  of  the Dogs  are  subject  to  all  eye  troubles  that  hu-
mans are,  and  perhaps  more  so.  Eye  troubles  I  have  had  great  success
in  treating,  and  when  I  see  them  appear  in  a  dog  I  am  not  at  all  worried.
They  must  be  cared  for  at  once,  however.  Accidents  to  the  eye  are  not
uncommon,  as  from  scratches  by  a  cat,  injuries  from- a  blow,  or  in  fighting.
In  such  cases  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  bathe  it  with  warm  water  for
from  fifteen  to  thirty  minutes,  this  to  reduce  the  swelling  and  inflamma-
tion which  follows.     If  the  injury  is  great,  a  veterinarian  had  best  be  called
in  but  otherwise  Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion,  "No    1"  or  "No.   2,"  can  be  used
three  or  four  times  daily  with  good  results,  just  a  few  drops:
Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion — No.    1.
Cocaine     10   grains
Sulphate   of   zinc    10   grains
Rose  water,  imported    2  ounces
Now,  as  to  the  above,  this  is  the  one  I  had  in  First  Edition  of  this
book,  only  there  I  had  in  it  38  grains  of  cocaine,  instead  of  10  grains,  as
in  this.  Under  the  old  formula  I  used  it  "for  years,  and  with  it  I  saved
the  sight  of  hundreds  of- dogs.
A  lady  living  near  New  York  had  a  Blenheim  spaniel  that  was  nearly
blind  from  diseased  eyes.  She  took  it  to  a  celebrated  occulist  in  New  York,
who  pronounced  it  a  hopeless  case,  telling  her  that-  the  dog  would  go  totally
blind,  and  very  soon.  She  wrote  me  and  I  sent  her  this  prescription,  and
in  a  couple  of  weeks  her  dog's  eyes  were  as  sound  and  well  as  any  dog's
eyes  ever  were.  The  dog's  eyes  were  apparently  nearly  dropping  out  of  its
head,  and  looked  as  if  you  could  knock  them  off  with  your  finger,  when
she  took  him  to  this  eye  doctor.  When  she,  after  the  cure,  showed  the  dog
to  the  doctor  he  could  hardly  believe  it  was  the  same  dog,  and  said:  "Well,
it's  simply  wonderful."
Now   here   is
Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion  "No.  2."
Acid    boracic     10  grains
Cocaine     9  grains
Sulphate  of  zinc    ". 2  grains
Aqua    camphor     1  tablespoonful
Aqua    rosa     1  tablespoonful
Drop  in  eye,  a  few  drops,  two  or  three  times  daily.
I  now  consider  "No.  2"  a  better  one  than  "No.  1,"  for  most  all  eye
troubles,  and  have  used  it  for  several  years  instead  of  "No.  1."  It  can
never  do  any  harm,  but  always  benefit.  This  one,  due  to  the  camphor
water  in  it,  will  not  keep  well  for  over  a  few  weeks  or  so,  and  therefore
should  this  be  remembered  and  not  used  when  having  stood  too  long.
Either  should  be  always  tightly  corked,  and  a  glass  stoppered  bottle  is
much  the  best.  Only  get  half  the  prescription  filled  at  a  time,  probably
enough  for  the  case,  and  saves  extra  expense.  If  any  trouble  in  getting  it,
I  can  sent  it  by  mail  for  sixty  cents.
AVhenever  I  find  any  trouble  in  any  of  my.  dogs  eyes  I  at  once  use  the
No.  2,  even  in  case  of  a  slight  cold  caught  and  which  had  settled  into  the
eye,  as  shown  by  inflammation,  mattery  or  watery  discharge,  or  even  only
an  apparent  weakness  or  blinking  when  dog  was  exposed  to  a  strong  light.
In  such   cases,  bathing   the  eyes   first,   with   a   Boracic  Acid  solution,    (how
to  make  is  given  under  that  heading),  see  index,  just  a  couple  drops  twice
a   day,   is  required.
Pugs,  toy  spaniels  and  all  dogs  with  prominent  or  "pop  eyes,"  as
they  are  termed,  are  greatly  troubled  with  their  eyes,  and  here  is  where
I  found  out  the  merits  of  my  own  eye  remedies.
You  may  discover  some  morning  the  eye  of  your  dog  covered  with
a  blue  film,  this  is  so  common  in  pop  eyed  dogs  that  I  named  it  "blue  eye"
for  short.  Very  rapidly  this  eye,  the  ball,  will  enlarge,  and  if  not  promptly
treated  will  assume  proportions  that  are  apparently  startling,  and  in  a
few  days  if  not  taken  care  of,  the  ball  of  the  eye  would  bulge  out  so  much
that  it  would  seem  as  if  it  would  drop  out  of  its  head.  Don't  be  alarmed,
for  my  lotion  "No.  2"  will  take  care  of  this,  will  cure  the  eye,  which
in  due  time  will  be  sound  as  ever,  the  same  as  it  was  before  this  trouble
appeared,  and  the  sight  saved,  as  perfect  as  ever.  No.  2  will  never  fail  to
cure  ulceration  and  perforation  of  the  ball  of  the  eye  if  used  in  time.  In
some  cases  a  white  spot  or  speck  will  remain,  but  the  sight  is  all  right,
and  to  remove  this  spot  use  the  following:
Eye  Salve.
Vaseline    1   ounce
Yellow  oxide  of  mercury    2   grains
Mix,  use  daily,  putting  inside  the  eye  a  portion  about  the  size  of  a  pea,
then  closing  the  eye  rub  it  gently.  This  prescription  should  be
thoroughly  and  carefully  mixed  by  your  druggist.  This  is  very  im-
portant-
In  other  cases  the  "No.  2"  has  done  all  the  curing,  and  there  was  no
white  spot  left.  Due  to  the  present  stringent  laws  in  many  states  as  to
narcotics,  it  will  be  necessary  to  have  your  doctor  write  this  prescription
because  of  the  cocaine  in  it.  Where  I  'discovered"  this  "No.  2"  was  in
the  case  of  a  Pug  dog  I  had  bought,  that  when  I  received  her  from  the
express  company,  had  gotten  this  on  her  long  trip,  and  I  at  once  took  her
to  my  own  eye  doctor,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Heflebower,  (now  one  of  the  greatest,
if  not  the  greatest,  eye  specialist  in  the  .world,  today.  My  bill  with  him
for  this  dog  was  eighteen  dollars),  and  now  with  "No.  2"  it  can  be  cured
for  less  than  a  dollar.  I  consider  this  "No.  2"  worth  more  than  twenty
times  the  cost  of  a  copy  of  this  book.
Dogs  are  subject  to  affections  of  the  eye  in  more  or  less  degree  ac-
cording to  their  breed  and  uses.  Hunting  dogs  are  naturally,  owing  to  the
nature  of  their  work,  more  subject  than  other  dogs  to  receive  injuries
from  thorns,  dust  and  dirt  and  other  foreign  matter.  This  will  be  followed
by  more  or  less  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  lining  the  eye-
lids, which  is  attended  by  a  watery  discharge  at  first  and  assuming  a  more
purulent  condition  as  the  trouble  increases.
It  is  well  known  that  a  small  particle  of  grit  may  remain  under  an
eyelid  in  spite  of  fomentations,  and  should  the  eye  be  examined  without
discovery  of  the  source  of  trouble,  very  often  an  application  of  pure  olive
oil  with  a   camel's  hair  brush   to   the   underpart  of  the   eyelid   Avill   often
succeed  in  carrying  off  the  irritant,  which  may  be  too  small  to  discern.
This,  however,  is  usually  to  be  considered  merely  a  preliminary  step,  and
my  Eye  Lotion  No.  2  should  be  then  used  to  remove  the  inflammation  thus
caused.  If  your  dog  brings  about  a  swollen  or  inflamed  condition  of  the
eyelids  through  a  chance  scratch  of  the  claws  in  rubbing  their  face,  use
my  Eye  Lotion  No.  2,  after  having  first  bathed  the  parts  with  warm  water.
Different  form  of  indigestion  may  be  associated  with  irritation  of  the
mucous  membranes  throughout,  and  the  eyes  will  suffer  in  common  with
the  other  parts.  Rheumatism  is  also  one  of  the  maladies  which  are  at-
tended with  inflammation,  more  or  less  pronounced,  of  the  eyes,  with  the
eyeball  itself  and  the  lids  participating  in  the  disorder.  It  must,  therefore,
be  obvious  that  the  common  expression,  "a  discharge  from  the«eyes,"  may
refer  to  a  variety  of  morbid  conditions  which  are  not  to  be  counteracted
by  an  application  of  a  lotion  to  the  eye.  Perhaps  a  safe  guide  for  the
tyro  in  medicine  may  be  found  in  the  duration  of  the  discharge.  In  any
case  of  simple  irritation  from  the  presence  of  dirt  or  grit  it  may  be  fairly  ex-
pected that  the  symptoms  will  cease  very  quickly  upon  the  application  of
simple  remedies,  that  is  to  say  after  it  has  been  clearly  ascertained  that
there  is  no  offending  body  adherent  to  the  underneath  part  of  the  eyelid.
The  continuance  of  the  discharge  week  after  week,  or  even  month  after
month,  may  certainly  be  taken  to  mean  that  something  more  than  ordinary
irritation  of  a  simple  kind  is  present,  and  under  such  circumstances  the
chances  are  that  the  common  eye  water,  for  example,  three  or  four  grains  of
boracic  acid  in  an  ounce  of  rose  water,  for  example,  three  or  four  grains  of
possibly  do  some  harm  by  checking  the  discharge,  which  is  really  critical
in  its  character.  The  proper  course  in  such  cases  would  be  to  consult  an
expert  in  diseases  of  the  dog,  who  will  most  probably  be  able  to  find  some
constitutional  cause  to  account  for  what  has  been  looked  upon  as  a  local
disorder.
Eye,  Amaurosis  of  the. — This  is  a  loss  of  sight,  partial  or  entire,  arising
from  one  of  several  causes;  the  optic  nerve  is  palsied,  which  may  have
arisen  from  a  blow  near  the  eye.  Exhaustion  from  suckling  will  produce
amaurosis  and  bitches  sometimes  exhibit  it  during  gestation;  excess  of  light
is  also  a  cause.  The  eye  is  unnaturally  clear  and  glittering,  the  pupil  ex-
panded and  fixed,  and  that  the  dog  is  partially  or  entirely  blind  is  seen  by
his  stepping  high  and  with  needless  care  when  nothing  is  in  his  way  and
running  against  things  that  are.  If  when  you  feint  a  blow  the  eye  does  not
move,    total   blindness   may   be   assumed.
Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion  No.  2  (See  Opthalmia)  may  do  a  lot  of  good  if
used  at  once,  as  I  have  never  found  any  case  of  eye  trouble  that  it  did  not
help  or  cure.  This  eye  lotion  should  not  be  kept  on  hand  very  long,  how-
ever, as  the  camphor  water  in  it  destroys  its  virtues  after  a  time.  If  you
find  the  trouble  due  to  a  deranged  nervous  system,  3  to  10  drops  of  tincture
of  nux  vomica  in  a  little  water,  twice  daily  after  food,  is  useful.
Eyeball,  Protrusion  of. — It  sometimes  occures  in  fighting  that  the  eye-
ball is  forced  out  of  its  socket,  and  the  lid,  contracting,  prevents  its  return.
I  cannot  recommend  the  amateur  to  attempt  to  return  the  eyeball  to  its
place,  but  the  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  sent  for,  and  in  the  meantime
a  small  stream  of  lukewarm  water  should  be  kept  running  onto  the  part
to  keep  the  muscles  relaxed  as  much  as  possible,  to  facilitate  the  necessary
operations  in   returning  the  eyeball  to  its  place.
Eyes,  Watery  or  Weeping. — This  trouble  seems  to  be  inherited  by
some  breeds  of  dogs,  such  as  Italian  greyhounds,  Blenheim  spaniels,  Mal-
tese terriers  and  white  Toy  poodles.  In  these  cases  a  strong  astringent
will  do  harm  and  induce  inflammation.  Bathing  with  an  infusion  of  green
tea  will  have  a  good  effect,  and  the  use  of  the  following  simple  eye  lotion
will  do  much  good.  I  use  it  for  any  ordinary  inflammation  due  to  a  cold.
Take  2  grams  of  ordinary  rochelle  salts  to  2  ounces  of  rose  water  and  drop
in  eyes  twice  a  day.  Being  a  cheap  remedy,  I  also  bathe  the  eyes  with  it
instead  of  water,  a  six  ounce  mixture  only  costing  a  dime  of  any  reasonable
druggist.  This  weakness  may  arise  from  a  slight  inflammation.  A  purge
if  the  dog  is  gross  and  fat,  and  you  can  use  the  following  Lotion  for  Weak
Eyes:
Sulphate  of  zinc '. 12   grains
Laudanum    %    ounce
Distilled    water 6   ounces
Eyelids,  Inversion  of  the  Lower  Lid  of This  causes  serious  trouble,
opthalmia,  etc.  An  operation  is  the  only  means  of  cure,  which  should  be
performed  by  a  skilled  veterinarian,  as  in  unskilled  hands  serious  mischief
would  arise.  A  piece  of  skin  is  removed  below  the  eye,  and  a  small  muscle
which  is  responsible  for  the  turning  in  of  the  eye,  is  severed.  The  wound
should  not  be  sutured,  but  allowed  to  heal  under  a.  scab,  which  helps  to
pull  the  eyelid  outward  and  slightly  downward,  relieving  the  condition
naturally.
This  is  not  very  common  in  many  breeds,  but  in  some  breeds  that  have
a  small,  deep  set-in  eye,,  as  Chow  Chows,  some  Terriers,  it  is  often  found.
If  an  operation  is  decided  upon,  remember  the  danger  of  chloroform  if  it
be  a  Chow  Chow.  I  have  a  Chow  that  has  had  this  trouble  in  both  eyes,
for  two  years  that  I  showed  and  made  a  champion  of  during  this  time.  I
had  my  own  eye  specialist  come  to  my  kennels  prepared  to  perforin  the
operation,  and  after  a  look  at  the  dog  and  his  eyes,  said  to  me:  "I  am
afraid  if  I  give  this  dog  chloroform,  that  it  will  mean  a  dead  dog,"  so
the  doctor  did  not  operate.  He  told  me,  however,  to  slip  the  hairs  off  of
the  eyelid,  and  paint  with  colodion  every  few  days,  under  the  eyes  across
the  lid,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  wide;  also,  to  wash  away  the  whitish
discharge  morning  and  night,  and  then  to  drop  in  the  eyes  a  few  drops  of
the  following:
Hydrastes 2   drams
Camphor   water    G   drams
Which  treatment  I  am  keeping  up  yet,  the  result  being  that  the  dog's
sight  is  as  keen  and  perfect  as   ever,   and  bids  fair   to   continue  so.     The
colodion  dries  quickly,  and  then  after  dry,  I  put  a  second  coat  on  top  of
the  first  one.
*
Eye  Iritis,  or  Inflammation  of  the  Iris,  is  sometimes  seen  in  dogs.     The
iris  being  the  membrane  that  gives  the  color  to  the  eye,  in  the  center  of
which  is  the  pupil.     Deep-seated  inflammation  is  usually  the  cause,   or  by
direct   violence.      Symptoms   are   contraction   of   the   pupil,    which    does   not
have  the  same  power  as  usual  of  contracting  and  dilating  to  regulate  the
amount  of  light  to  be  admitted;   tears  flow  over  lid,  light  is  avoided,  and
the  eye  is  bloodshot.      If  the  inflammation  increases  and  is  prolonged,  the
usual   termination   would   be   suppuration    (formation   of   matter),   and   the
loss  of  sight.     First  place  the  dog  in  a  darkened  kennel  or  room,  apply  hot
fomentations   continuously  to   the   eye,   and   introduce  sulphate  of  atropine
into  the  organ.     Discs  of  sulphate  of  atropine  you  can  get  at  your  druggist's,
with  instructions  how  to  use.
Eyelashes,  Turned  in. — This  occurs  occasionally,  the  eyelash  may  grow
across  the  pupil,  interfering  with  the  dog's  comfort  and  vision.  In  ordi-
nary cases  simply  clipping  with  the  scissors  will  do,  but  sometimes  excision
and  cauterization  of  the  part  is  necessary.  Either  of  my  Eye  Lotions  to  be
used  if  inflammation  is  present.
Haw,  Enlargement  of. — The  haw,  or  third  eyelid,  as  it  is  sometimes
called,  is  a  fold  of  membrane  situated  at  the  inner  corner  of  the  eye,  capable
of  expansion,  and  is  used  to  sweep  across  the  globe  of  the  eye  to  cleanse  it
from  flies,  dirt  or  other  foreign  bodies  that  have  blown  in.  This  membrane,
from  constitutional  causes,  from  blows  or  irritation  from  extraneous  matter
lodged  in  the  eye,  becomes  inflamed  and  enlarged,  which  interferes  with  the
sight,  preventing  the  eyelids  from  closing.  My  Eye  Lotion  No.  2  would  do
good  here  also,  the  treatment  being  astringent  lotions,  lunar  caustic,  or
cutting  off  the  excrescent  growth,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.
Eye,  Opthalmia  of  the — What  is  called  the  conjunctiva  is  the  mucous
membrane  that  lines  the  inner  surface  of  the  eyelids,  and  as  its  name
imports,  joints  these  with  the  eyeball,  and  opthalmia  is  an  inflammation
of  this  mucous  membrane.  This  is  a  disease  unfortunately  common  in
dogs;  it  varies  greatly  in  severity,  and  in  some  cases,  when  arising  from
constitutional  causes,  becomes  chronic.  Sporting  dogs  have  been  said  to
be  more  liable  to  it  than  other  breeds,  but  I  do  not  think  so,  and  I  believe
the  idea  originated  from  the  fact  that  these  have  generally  been  more  ex-
posed to  circumstances  exciting  it  than  other  breeds.  From  my  own  exper-
ience, I  am  inclined  to  think  it  is  more  prevalent  in  pugs  and  other  pets
overfed,  and  consequently  liable  to  frequent  derangement  of  the  digestive
organs.
Anything  that  will  set  up  local  irritation,  as  the  intrusion  of  dust,  flies,
etc.,  or  the  scratch  of  a  cat,  or  a  blow,  exposure  to  sudden  and  extreme
changes  of  temperature- — as  plunging  into  or  being  thrown  into  cold  water
when  heated — and  excessive  exertion  is  occasionally  a  cause,  but  the  most
common   sources   are   the   vapors   of   foul   kennels   or   hot   stables,   and   de-
rangement  of  the  digestive  organs;  an  inverted  eyelash  may  occasion  it.
Opthalmia  is  very  often  an  accompaniment  of  distemper.  There,  is  one
form  of  disease  which  is  attended  with  considerable  discharge  from  the
eyes  undoubtedly  possessing  contagious  qualities.  This  affection  is  known
as  contagious  optbalmia.  Perhaps  the  most  marked  illustration  of  this  va-
riety of  the  affection  in  the  dog  is  that  which  is  associated  with  distemper,
and  it  may  be  noted  here  that  by  the  term  opthalmia  is  meant  the  disease
which  implicates  the  eyeball  itself.
The  symptoms  are  an  intolerance  of  light  and  a  watery  discharge,
and  on  the  eyelids  being  opened  and  examined  there  is  seen  to  be  conges-
tion of  the  lining  membrane,  and  across  the  cornea,  or  front  clear  portion
of  the  eye,  there  are  red  streaks,  and  ulceration  soon  follows,  and  a  white
film  abscures  the  eye  and  interferes  with  the  sight.
More  or  less  opacity  of  the  cornea  is  one  of  the  symptoms  of  opthalmia
either  of  the  simple  and  contagious  variety,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  dog
affected  with  the  ophthalmia  of  distemper,  the  indications  are  of  a  most
marked  character.  The  conjunctival  membrane  is  highly  injected  and
reddened,  the  cornea  becomes  opaque  early  in  the  disease  and  very  fre-
quently a  small  spot  of  ulceration  appears  in  the  center  of  it,  which  rapidly
extends,  and  in  many  cases  penetrates  the  cornea,  completely  allowing
the  fluid  in  the  anterior  chamber  of  the  eye  to  escape.  A  .profuse  dis-
charge of  a  purulent  character  continues  during  the  whole  course  of  the
disease,  and  one  of  the  annoying  features  of  the  complaint  is  the  glueing
together  of  the  eyelids,  which  can  only  be  separated  by  very  careful  and
continued   fomentations   of  warm  water   or,   what  is  better,   warm   milk.
When  treating,  the  cause  should  be  first  sought  for,  and  if  it  is  some
foreign  irritating  body,  or  an  eyelash  growing  in  a  wrong  direction,  these
should  be  removed.  A  mild  dose  of  cooling  aperient  medicine  should  be
given,  and  the  eye  should  be  well  and  frequently  bathed  with  a  decoction
of  poppy  heads;  and  afterward,  if  the  inflammation  is  considerable,  the
following   lotion   may   be   used   several   times  a   day   with   advantage:
Eye  Lotion. — Extract  of  belladonna,  half  a  dram,  rose  water,  four
ounces;"  wine  of  opium,  two  drams — mixed.
Eye,  Cataract  of  the — This  is  an  opacity  of  the  eyeball,  a  whitish,
opaque  spot,  which  gradually  enlarges  and  has  generally  ended  in  blind-