When  the  disease  becomes  chronic,  stronger  remedies  must  be  used;  oint-
ments containing  juniper  tar,  green  soap  and  sulphur  are  of  value.  The
ointment  of  the  nitrate  and  ammoniate  of  mercury  are  much  used.  In
cases  where  the  skin  is  especially  sensitive,  silver  nitrate,  1  grain  to  the
ounce  of  water  will  often  effect  a  cure.  In  the  chronic  cases,  especially,
iron,  arsenic,  calomel  and  quinine  are  to  be  used.  The  animal,  while  under-
going treatment,  should  be  kept  clean,  and  give  plenty  of  exercise.  An
eruption,  resembling  eczema,  may  be  induced  by  large  doses  of  mercury.
The  skin  becomes  red  and  swollen,  then  forms  large  scales  and  hardens.
This  eruption  is  generally  limited  to  the  limbs  and  scrotum.  Some  of  the
symptoms  are  salivation,  loss  of  appetite,  eyelids  closed,  dullness,  offensive
odor  from  the  skin,  and  rarely,  death."
I  now  give  you  Dent's  article  on  Eczema,  written  expressly  for  thia
book:
"In  medical  nomenclature,  eczema  is  a  very  comprehensive  term.  It
is  applied  to  all  diseases  of  the  skin  (except  true  mange  or  dog  itch),  and
on  account  of  the  irritation  set  up  during  an  attack  of  mange,  it  is  generally
complicated  with  eczema,  which  remains  to  annoy  the  dog  and  his  owner
long  after  the  mange  mites  are  destroyed.
"Dogs  are  particularly  subject  to  skin  diseases,  that  are  the  bane
alike  of  the  breeder  keeping  a  large  number  of  dogs  in  kennels,  or  the
single  house  pet.  While  true  dog  itch  is  common  enough,  ninety  per  cent
of  all  skin  diseases  are  eczema.
"There  is  a  close  relation  between  the  skin  of  the  dog  and  his  digestive  ,
organs,  and  a  deranged  stomach  will  quickly  find  expression  through  an
eruption  of  the  skin;  any  poverty  or  plethoric  condition  of  the  blood  will
also  be  expressed  in  the  same  way.  If  there  is  any  defect  or  unhealthy
condition  of  the  digestive  tract,  and  it  is  called  upon  to  digest  unsuitable
food,  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  before  poisons  are  introduced  into  the
blood  that  will  produce  inflammation  and  eruptions  of  the  skin.  Strictly
speaking,  eczema  is  an  inflammation  of  the  skin  due  to  the  causes  above
mentioned,  and  numerous  others  such  as  old,  dirty,  damp  bedding,  lack  of
exercise,  over-feeding,  starvation,  irritation  from  insects,  lice,  fleas  or  from
true  mange.  In  most  cases  it  can  be  ascribed  to  a  disordered  condition  of
the  blood  and  general  system.
"Eczema  assumes  a  variety  of  forms.  In  one  very  common  form  there
is  first  a  redness  of  the  entire  skin  with  a  dry  scaly  dandruff  that  flakes
off.  In  another  form  there  is  an  eruption  of  small  distinct  pimples  or
papules  that  do  not  always  break  but  can  be  easily  felt,  like  shot  under
the  skin.  In  another  form  there  is  a  formation  of  scurvy  crusts  of  a  yel-
lowish white  color  that  smells  like  mice,  and  underneath  this  crust  are
small,    cup-shaped    ulcers.
"Follicular  mange,  or  red  mange,  is  due  to  a  sort  of  vegetable  fungoid
mite  that  lives  at  the  base 'of  the  hair  and  around  the  sebaceus  gland.
It  turns  the  skin  a  sort  of  brownish  red,  kills  the  hair  root,  and  is  most
commonly  found  along  the  back  near  the  root  of  the  tail.
"In  the  commonest  form  of  eczema. there  will  first  be  noticed  a  patch
on  some  part  of  the  dog's  body  that  is  inflamed  or  covered  with  pimples.
These  pimples  increase  in  size  and  become  a  vesicle  filled  with  a  clear  tur-
bulent or  purulent  fluid.  This  sore  breaks,  the  fluid  escapes,  runs  over
the  skin  which  it  irritates,  and  dries  into  scabs  which  mat  the  hair  together.
The  inflammation  affects  the  hair  follicle,  the  hair  drops  out  leaving  bare
spots,  and  there  is  a  constant  exudate  of  matter,  which  spreads  and  forms
more  hare  spots.  The  skin  becomes  ulcerated  or  thickened  and  wrinkled.
The  dog  is  tormented  by  the  intolerable  itching  past  all  point  of  endur-
ance, scratches  himself  until  he  bleeds,  cannot  sleep  or  eat,  gets  no  rest
and  becomes  a  mere  wreck  of  his  former  self.
"Treatment. — As  previously  stated,  eczema  and  inflammation  of  the
skin  are  largely  due  to  constitutional  causes,  and  there  is  no  specific  treat-
ment or  radical  cure  for  all  cases,  and  the  owner  must  exercise  his  power
of  judgment  and  reason,  and  possibly  try  two  or  three  different  preparations
before  effecting  a  cure.
"The  following  course  must  be  pursued.  First  make  a  change  in  the
animal's  diet  if  he  is  being  fed  on  grains  and  vegetables  with  little  or  no
meat,  give  him  an  increased  amount  of  meat  both  lean  and  raw,  with  little
or  no  bread  or  vegetables,  and  vice  versa.  If  the  dog  is  fat  and  plethoric,
generally  prosperous,  and  inclined  to  be  constipated,  give  him  a  good  laxa-
tive pill  every  night  and  fast  for  twenty-four  hours.  If  he  is  thin  and  un-
thrifty give  cod  liver  oil  emulson  with  from  two  to  five  grains  of  the
sulphate  or  iron  of  Sergeant's  Iron  and  Arsenic  Pills.  The  fat  plethoric
dog  should  have  a  blood  purifying  and  cooling  pill  twice  a  day  for  some
time.  Clayton's  Blood  Cooling  Pill  is  very  good,  or  the  following  prescrip-
tion:
Flower   of  sulphur    2   ounces
Cream   of  tartar 3   ounces
Bromide  of  potassium   3   drams
Mix  and  divide  into  eighteen  powders  and  give  one  in  the  morning.
"The  blood  purifying  and  cooling  pills  mentioned  are  th»  best  thing
to   use,  handy  and  easier  to  give.
"Besides  the  mange  and  eczema  cures  on  the  market  the  following
are  useful  in  cases  where  there  is  great  irritation  with  little  or  no  eruption:
Plumbi   acet %  dram
Soda  bibarat 1  %  drams
Glycerin     2  ounces
Aqua    camphor     , 8  ounces-
Lanolin     4  ounces
Lard     4  ounces
Salicylic    acid     1  ounce
Boracic   acid    1  ounce
Apply  once  a  day  and  wash  every   week  and  repeat.
Another  is:
Carbolized    glycerin 1   ounce.
Laudanum    2   ounces
Carbonate  of  potash    2   drams
Apply  all  over,  twice  a  day,  wash  twice  a  week.
Another  is:
Boracic   acid    1    ounce
Salicyclic    acid     1  ounco
Laudanum     1    ounce
Whale    oil 14    ounces
Apply  all  over  twice  a  day  and  wash  once  a  week  with  Eberhart's
Soap."
"The  Kennelman"  has  this  to  say  of  Eczema,  published  in  American
Stock-Keeper:
"Obstinate  cases  of  eczema  are  most  distressingly  aggravating  to  the
kennel  owner.  In  a  majority  of  instances  this  condition  arises  from  the
continued  use  of  starchy  foods.  When  I  he  symptoms  appear — pustulous
formations  at  the  roots  af  the  hair,  after  a  preliminary  redness  of  the
skin  and  wet  oozy  sores  that  appear  to  the  size  of  a  half  dollar  in  a  night,
the  diet  should  be  attended  to.  Lean,  raw  meat  must  be  fed  almost  ex-
clusively. Then  the  blood  must  be  purified,  and  exercise  given  freely.  A
handy  preparation  that  will  be  found  excellent  as  a  general  cleanser  and
preventive  is  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  (not  weights)  of  Epsom  salts,  cream
of  tartar  and  sulphur  lac;  a  pinch  every  morning,  in  quantity  according
to  the  size  of  the  dog,  dropped  on  the  tongue  for  a  week  will  do  good.
It  is  a  remedial  agent  that  is  useful  at  any  time.  In  bad  chronic  cases
this  mixture  will  do  well — one  drop  of  fluid  extract  of  colchicum  and  five
grains  of  sulphate  of  soda,  three  times  daily  in  a  capsule;  feed  raw  beef
and  no  cereal  food.  Apply  to  the  sores  equal  parts  of  oil  of  tar  and  alcohol,
or  Eberhart's  Skin   Cure.
"Another  good  thing  is  the  liver  of  sulphur  one  buys  in  pound  tins
n  diseases
(Sulph.  Potass).  Dissolve  a  teaspoonful  in  a  quart  of  warm  water  and
apply  at  once  to  the  sores,  in  fact,  the  whole  body  should  be  covered  with
it.  If  a  dip  is  required  for  several  dogs  make  the  solution  of  the  above
proportions;  if  too  strong  the  hair  will  be  burned  off.  This  is  a  won-
derfully good  remedy  for  puppy  rash  that  develops  often  after  puppies
leave  the  mother;   and  if  the  puppy  licks  itself  all  the  better."
Fatness,  Excessive. — This  should  never  exist  in  any  dog  and  need  not
providing  it  has  been  fed  properly  and  sufficiently  exercised.  It  is  a  hard
thing  to  do  to  reduce  a  dog,  especially  an  old  one,  after  it  has  been  allowed
to  get  into  this  condition.  However,  some  dogs  are  predisposed  to  obesity,
and  to  put  on  fat  even  when  on  a  meagre  diet;  such  being  the  case  with
a  great  many  pugs  and  different  species  of  spaniels.  A  certain  amount  of
fat  is  not  only  a  sign  of  health,  but  also  desirable,  as  it  is  the  store  of  fuel
that  nature  lays  up  to  meet  future  exigencies;  but  an  excess  of  fat  con-
stitutes a  morbid  and  diseased  state  of  the  body.
A  .common  effect  of  excessive  fat  is  to  set  up  skin  disease,  with  dis-
charge therefrom,  which  is  Nature's  means  of  ridding  the  system  of  the
superfluous  matter.  Or  the  fat  accumulates  round  vital  organs,  interfering
with  the  animal's  respiration,  making  the  breathing  labored,  wheezy,  and
asthamatical,  painful  to  the  sufferer,  which  blows  and  pants  on  the  slightest
extra  exertion,  and  most  distressing  to  the  owner.  In  bitches  not  allowed
to  breed,  fat  accumulates  round  the  kidneys  and  ovaries;  the  heart  also
becomes  surrounded  with  fat,  and  what  is  called  fatty  infiltration  or  fatty
degeneration  ensues,  which  may  cause  sudden  death.
Causes. — It  is  caused  by  confinement,  lack  of  exercise  and  an  over
abundance  of  food  of  too  rich  a  quality  of  fat-producing  material.  Castrat-
ing of  dogs  and  spaying  of  bitches — and  I  don't  believe  it  right  to  do  either
— will  cause  accumulations  of  adipose  matter,  as  it  takes  from  the  dog
one  of  the  organs  of  secretion,  and  all  dogs  that  refuse  sexual  connection
will  become  obese.  All  dogs  should  be  allowed  Nature's  privilege  at  least
a  few  times  during  their  lives.
Treatment. — Give  a  brisk  purgative  two  or  three  times  a  week  and
give  two  to  three  grains  of  the  iodide  of  potash  in  water  twice  a  day  after
feeding.  Gradually  decrease  the  allowance  of  food  and  feed  only  stale
bread,  dog  biscuit  or  crackers,  dry  if  they  will  eat  them,  if  not  moisten
with  a  very  little  milk  or  thin  soup;  do  not  feed  grease,  fat,  potatoes  or
sweets  of  any  kind.  As  the  food  is  decreased  slowly  increase  the  amount
of  exercise,  and  as  the  animal  gradually  comes  into  form  omit  the  purga-
tives and  feed  raw  lean  beef,  chopped  fine — gradually  increasing  the
amount.
Fleas. — These  are  familiar  to  every  one,  I  mean  the  fleas  that  are
found  on  dogs,  and  no  description  is  really  necessary.  There  are  a  number
of  good  remedies.
"Eberhart's  Dog  Soap"  is  the  easiest  and  surest  remedy  for  fleas  of  any-
thing made  and  much  less  trouble  to  use.  All  your  dog  needs  is  a  good
shampoo  with  this  soap  swice,  twenty-four  hours  apart.  After  applying  it
thoroughly  all  over  the  dog,  not  missing  a  spot,  or  you  leave  some  fleas
that  will  be  heard  from,  then  rinse  the  dog  in  lukewarm  water  and  dry
thoroughly  with  rough  towels.  There  is,  however,  nothing — unless  you
would  keep  some  preparation  on  the  dog  all  the  time  in  summer — that
will  keep  fleas  off  of  a  dog  in  case  he  comes  in  contact  with  them  again,  as
he  may  do  if  he  meets  another  dog  that  has  them,  when  your  dog  is  certain
to  get  a  new  supply.  If  all  his  bedding  is  not  destroyed  while  being
treated,  or  his  sleeping  box  not  thoroughly  disinfected,  he  will  again  get
more  fleas.  The  best  plan  is  to  burn  all  the  bedding  he  has  used  in  his
sleeping  box,  basket  or  kennel,  and  then  scrub  it  out  with  some  good  dis-
infectant, getting  into  the  cracks  and  corners  with  Standard  Disinfectant,
(see  advertisement  of  the  Standard  Disinfectant  Co.).,  which  will  do  the
work.  Fleas  breed  every  twenty-four  hours,  so  that  in  using  my  soap  you
must  give  the  second  bath  twenty-four  hours  later  to  destroy  the  young
ones.
Dogs  which  have  dense,  long  coats  are  subjects  of  special  delight  to
the  fleas.  The  mouth  of  the  flea  is  specially  adapted  for  sucking;  the  wings
are  rudimentary,  being  represented  by  four  minute  scales.  The  lavse  is
a  footless  grub,  which,  in  about  twelve  days,  spins  a  "cocoon,"  (i.  e.,  an
outer  covering  of  silky  hairs)  for  itself,  and  becomes  a  chrysalis,  from  which
the  perfect  flea  emerges  in  about  a  fortnight  more.
Here  are  also  some  home-made  remedies  that  you  can  try — they  will
all  kill  fleas — but  my  soap  is  so  sure,  so  pleasant  to  use,  and  also  so  bene-
ficial to  the  coat  that  it  seems  foolish  to  try  anything  else.  One  part  of
oil  of  cloves  to  20  parts  of  methylated  spirit.  Directions:  Apply  all  over
after  washing.  Or,  terebene  1  part,  glycerine  1  part,  methylated  spirits
4  parts.  Apply  as  before.  Or,  a  lime  and  sulphur  lotion,  made  by  boiling
16  ounces  of  sulphur  with  half  this  quantity  of  slacked  lime  in  a  gallon  of
water,  the  whole  being  boiled  down  to  2  quarts  and  filtered.  Apply  a3
above.  Or,  precipitated  sulphur  4  ounces,  powdered  camphor  1  ounce,
powdered  resin  1  ounce,  terebene  1  dram.  Directions:  Mix;  dust  well
into  the  hair.
There  are  two  flea  powders  made,  both  are  very  good,  to  rid  .a  dog
of  fleas,  if  you  prefer  a  powder  instead  of  a  liquid  remedy  as  is  often  de-
sirable, especially  in  cold  weather,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  dog  catching
cold.  Dr.  Clayton's,  (see  his  advertisement),  will  do  the  work,  if  used
as  directed.  The  other  one  is  "Vermilax  Flea  Powder,"  considered  one
of  the  best  made.  See  the  advertisement  of  Vermilax  Co.,  in  this  book.
I  carry  this  Flea  Powder  in  stock,  and  can  send  it  by  mail  postpaid,  at
thirty  cents  a  box.
Fistula  in  Anus.— This  is  not  uncommon  in  pampered  and  over-fed
dogs,  and  may  be  partial  or  complete.  It  usually  shows  as  an  opening  at
the  sides  of  the  anus  .extending  upwards  to  the  gut,  where  it  can  be  seen;
but  in  some  cases  there  is  no  external  opening.  It  is  caused  by  consti-
pation, when  the  hardened  feces  abrade  the  surface  in  its  expulsion,  or
neglected  piles,  resulting  in  ulceration;  or  fistula  of  the  anus  may  come
from   a   wound   inflicted   on   the   part.
Symptoms  of  Internal  Fistula. — The  dog  drags  himself  along  the
ground,   and   the   voided   matter   is   highly   offensive  and   often .  covered   or
streaked  with  blood  and  matter.  The  treatment  should  be  left  to  the
veterinary  surgeon,  who  will  lay  the  sinug  open  and  apply  remedies  to
set  up  healthy  action  and  close  it  up.
Flatulency. — Is  not  very  common  in  adult  dogs,  but  oftener  met  with
in  puppies.  It  is  unmistakable  evidence  of  indigestion.  For  immediate
relief  the  treatment  should  consist  in  giving  to  a  20  lb.  dog  half  a  tea-
spoonful  of  carbonate  of  magnesia,  large  dogs  a  teaspoonful,  in  a  little
milk;  or  give  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  and  follow  with  5  gr.  to  15  gr.  of
carbonate  of  bismuth  three  times  a  day  dry  upon  the  tongue.  For  per-
manent  cure,    correct   the    indigestion.      See    Indigestion.
Foreign  Bodies  in  the  Intestines. — This  is  another  cause  of  obstruc-
tion in  the  bowels  to  which  dogs  are  peculiarly  liable.  Pieces  of  bone  "are
swallowed  of  such  size  and  substance  that  they  pass  through  the  diges-
tive organs  very  slightly  diminished,  and  getting  into  the  smaller  intestines,
cannot  pass  farther,  so  that  feces  accumulate  and  harden  until,  if  not  re-
lieved, inflammation  is  set  up.  Sometimes  stones  are  swallowed  and  cause
obstruction,  and  this  will  at  once  demonstrate  the  danger  of  throwing
stones  for  dogs  to  retrieve,  for,  in  their  eagerness,  they  are  apt  to  swallow
them,  especially  if  small.  Wool  or  rabbit  fur  swallowed  is  likely  to  ball
together  with  other  matter.     See  Obstruction  of  Bowels.
False  Joint. — Is  found  where  limb  was  improperly  set,  or  the  dog  in
unhealthy  condition.  It  is  the  non-union  of  the  bone  by  the  usual  osseous
deposits,  instead  of  which  there  is  a  fibrous  connection,  the  union  of  the
bones,  or  portions  of  them,  is  much  like  they  had  been  united  by  a  pi«ce
of  India  rubber;  the  two  pieces  of  bone  can  be  readiiy  moved,  while  the
limb  cannot  support  any  weight.  An  operation  is  often  attempted  to
set  up  inflammation  of  the  parts,  and  induce  osserous  or  bony  deposits,  but
experience  has  proven  such  operations  not  very  successful.
Fatty  Degeneration  of  the  Heart. — Previous  to  making  a  brief  refer-
ence to  this  diseased  state,  it  is  necessary  to  tell  the  reader  a  few  points
of  importance  in  connection  with  the  healthy  heart  of  the  dog.  It  is  a
hollow,  muscular  organ,  with  a  right  and  left  compartment  (the  ventricles).
In  shape  it  is  like  a  cone,  th  apex  of  the  cone  pointing  downwards  and
backwards.  The  base  is  made  up  of  two  compartments  of  the  body.  These
large  vessels  serve  to  suspend  the  heart  in  the  chest  cavity,  says  Frank
Townsend  Barton  in  British  Fancier.
"The  blood  coming  from  these  vessels  first  of  all  passes  into  the  two
compartments  at  the  base  (auricles),  and  from  these  through  valves  into
the    compartments    first    mentioned,    and    called    the    ventricles.
"The  weight  of  the  heart  varies  according  to  breed  and  age,  but  it
has  been  estimated  that  it  runs  from  -3  to  7  per  cent  of  the  weight  of  the
animal.  It  is  enclosed  in  a  bag  ,pericardium).  When  perfectly  healthy
it  should  be  dark  red  in  color,  firm  to  the  touch  of  the  finger,  and  the  traces
of  fat  running  down  the  various  grooves  upon  its  surface  are  a  sign  of  a
well-nourished  orgaa.
"Now,  when  it  is  affected  by  what  is  called  fatty  degeneration,  it  be-
comes very  pale,  thin  and  flabby,  greasy  to  the  touch,  with  one  or  more
patches  of  fat  upon  the  walls  of  the  ventricles.  This  is  brought  about  by
the  muscle  fibres  composing  the  heart  being  changed  or  replaced  by  fat.
"In  order  to  bring  about  this  condition  the  dog  need  not  be  fat  itself;
in  fact,  a  heart  in  this  state  is  far  more  likely  to  be  found  in  a  dog  which
is    thin    or   underfed.
"Dogs  which  are  excessively  fat  externaly  generally  show  the  same
internally;  that  is  to  say,  that  the  heart,  kidneys,  liver,  etc.,  may  be  com-
pletely imbedded  in  one  mass  of  fat;  but  then  it  must  be  understood  that
this  is  not  a  diseased  state  and  does  not  interfere  with  the  animal's  health
so  long  as  it  allows  these  different  organs  to  perform  their  work.  It  is
a  sign  of  over  rather  than  one  of  under  nutrition.
"The  fatty  degenerated  heart  is  a  diseased  one.  This  is  not  technical.
It  is  called  an  'infiltration,'  a  term  which  means  that  fat  is  formed  be-
tween  the  muscular  fibres.
"I  am  not  aware  that  there  is  any  symptom  or  symptoms  during  life
which  will  enable  us  to  tell  whether  the  heart  is  in  this  diseased  state.
An  opinion  can  only  be  purely  speculative.  Of  course,  the  heart  has  a
weak  beat,  and  the  animal  is  easily  knocked  out.  Sudden  death  is  likely
to  occur  either  from  failure  of  the  heart's  action,  or,  if  the  fat  is  in  the
form  of  a  patch  upon  the  wall,  from  sudden  rupture  of  the  wall  at  this  spot,,
whereby  the  blood  would  gush  suddenly  out  of  the  heart  into  the  bag
containing  it,  ceasing  to  beat  at  once.
"The  animal  must  be  prevented  from  any  severe  exertion.
"It   has   been    stated    that    this    disease   is   common    among    pampered,
asthmatical  pets,  the  truth  of  which  is  open  to  serious  doubt."
This  is  perhaps  the  most  frequent  form  of  heart  disease  found  in  the
dog;  it  is,  however,  seldom  diagnosed  during  life.  A  postmortem  will
show  in  such  cases  that  the  fibres  of  the  muscles  are  dotted  with  small
dark. spots  (these  are  globules  of  oil  within  the  sheath  of  the  fibre),  the
heart  tissue  is  soft  and  breaks  down  readily  under  the  finger.  Cause  may
arise  from  a  general  malnutrition  of  the  system,  or  from  senile  decay  due
to  old  age.  The  organ  not  always  wholly  involved,  and  when  only  a  part
is   affected    it   is   due   to   some   obstruction,    causing   local   malnutrition.
Warty  Growths  on  the  Valves  of  the  Heart. — The  valves  of  the  heart
are  sometimes  the  seat  of  small  wart-like  growths.  When  a  dog  has  been
a  constant  sufferer  from  rheumatism,  in  such  we  occasionally  meet  with