A  very  safe  plan  I've  found,  and  I  always  so  fit  up  the  stall  or  box,
is  to  fasten  a  shelf  a  few  inches  from  the  floor  to  the  sides  and  back  of  box,
extending  out  a  few  inches  so  that  if  she  gets  nervous  and  turns  around  too
often  to  get  a  place  to  suit  her,  the  pups  are  protected  from  being  laid  on
by  this  shelf.
It  is  generally  best  not  to  disturb  the  bitch  at  the  time  of  whelping,
but  in  case  of  fever  or  excitement,  or,  in  fact,  if  anything  indicating  trouble
be  detected,  it  may  be  necessary  for  some  one  to  remain  with  her,  and  for
the  pups  to  be  taken  away  and  kept  warm  until  normal  conditions  return.
Veterinarian  skill  may  be  necessary  in  some  conditions,  but  as  a  warm  place
for  the  pups  is  all  that  is  needed  for  a  couple  of  hours  after  birth,  it  is  easy
to  take  the  milk  from  the  teats  with  the  hand  if  the  fever  is  likely  to  have
rendered  it  injurious  to  the  pups  and  the  fever  may  be  quickly  remedied,
and  a  non-injurious  flow  made  in  time  for  the  pups  to  rejoin  their  mother.
The  very  best  advice  I  can  give  the  breeder  is,  do  not  interfere;  the  few
cases  where  it  will  be  necessary  to  do  so  will  only  add  force  to  this  rule.
When  help  is  called  for,  find  a  verterinary  surgeon  who  understands  treat-
ment of  dogs,  or  one  who  makes  dogs  a  specialty.  Many  veterinarians  are
all  right  as  to  horses  and  cows,  but  woefully  ignorant  as  to  dogs.  If  manual
assistance  has  to  be  given,  avoid  unnecessary  force.  When  labor  is  protract-
ed and  bitch  seems  to  need  assistance  to  create  more  labor  pains,  then  give
her  Fellows'  Compound  Syrup  of  Hypophosphate,  two  hours  apart;  the  dose
would  be  a  half  teaspoonful  for  a  bitch  of  15  to  25  lbs.,  and  three-quarters  of
"a  teaspoonful  for  a  25  to  40-lb.  bitch,  with  a  teaspoonful  for  larger  ones  up
to  60  lbs.,  while  for  very  large  bitches  such  as  a  St.  Bernard,  a  teaspoonful
and  a  half  would  be  the  dose.  Get  one  ounce  of  the  Fellows'  Compound
Syrup  of  Hypophosphate  and  have  your  druggist  add  to  it  four  grains  of
quinine.  I  have  found  this  very  valuable,  much  better  and  safer  than  ergot
(the  liquid  extract  of  rye),  which  is  liable  to  work  both  ways,  favorable
and  otherwise,  expanding  or  contracting  the  womb.  Such  medicine  is  not
always  necessary,  as  in  very  many  cases  Nature  takes  care  of  the  matter,
and  it  is  only  needed  and  advised  to  be  given  when  bitch  requires  assistance
— the  object  being  to  create  more  labor  pains  if  bitch  needs  the  same.  In
several  cases  of  bitches  that  required  the  Fellows'  Syrup  of  Hypophosphate
I   also   gave   an   injection   per  vagina   of  glycerine  put   into   hot   water  and
injected  luke  warm,  but  of  course  not  hot.
The  cases  of  greatest  danger  are  where  a  bitch  has  been  allowed  to
stray  during  cestrum,  and  was  bred  to  a  dog  of  much  larger  size  than  her-
self; and  very  finely  bred  and  highly  pampered  bitches  often  suffer  greatly,
and  die  in  the  act  of  giving  birth.  In  healthy  parturition  even,  considerable
time  is  often  occupied,  the  rest  between,  being  of  great  service  in  supporting
her  against  the  prostration  consequent  in  the  event.  The  bitch  should  not
be  interfered  with  in  these  intervals,  and  it  is  then  foolish  to  try  and  force
food  upon  her.  In  all  cases  where  difficulty  from  wrong  presentation  or
the  disproportioned  size  of  the  pups  occur,  both  from  motives  of  prudence
and  humanity  the  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  consulted  for  his  obstertic
knowledge,  and  skill  in  manipultion  will  save  much  unnecessary  suffering,
and  probably  the  lives  of  mother  and  pups.
Sometimes  there  are  one  or  two  very  late.  You  may  go  away,  assur-
ing yourself  all  is  over,  and  that  your  bitch  has  a  litter  of  only  five,  and
come  back  in  the  morning  to  find  seven  all  sucking  away  like  as  many
leeches,  and  the  mother  looking  so  proud  and  pleased  she  wouldn't  ex-
change places  with  a  princess  royal.
Should  the  clam's  supply  of  milk  prove  to  be  inadequate,  it  will  be
necessary  either  to  place  her  puppies  under  the  care  of  a  foster  mother
or  else  to  do  the  best  possible  under  the  circumstances  with  artificial  food.
The  former  is  always  a  risky  alternative  as  it  is  not  every  bitch  that  will
take  kindly  to  the  whelps  of  another,  and  unless  she  has  been  upon  the
premises  for  some  time  so  as  to  be  accustomed  to  the  surroundings  it  is
unlikely  that  she  will  do  them  justice.  Then,  too,  if  she  has  not  whelped
at  very  nearly  the  same  time  as  the  other,  there  is  likely  to  be  trouble  over
her  milk  supply.  Consequently  it  is  safest  and  best,  though  possibly  a  little
more  troublesome,  to  bring  the  puppies  up  by  hand  if  their  mother  has  not
enough  milk  to  provide  them    with   nourishment.
Fortunately,  however,  for  the  dog  owner,  Sprabt's  Patent  step  in  here
to  assist  him  in  his  dilemma,  as,  in  the  orphan  Puppy  Food  prepared  by  this
Company,  a  most  excellent  substitute  for  mothers'  milk  will  he  found;  in
fact,  there  is  nothing  procurable  that  can  compare  with  it.  In  the  case  of
many  substitutes  for  the  natural  nourishing  fluid  of  pups,  it  will  be  found
that  the  stomachs  of  the  youngsters  are  liable  to  be  upset  by  some,  while
in  other  instances  the  puppies  do  not  thrive,  but  in  fact  dwindle  away.
Wtten  Spratt's  Puppy  Food  is  used  in  a  kennel  there  is  no  prospect  of
either  of  these  evils,  if  the  food  is  prepared  in  the  proper  manner  and
ordinary  attention  is  paid  to  matters  of  detail.  In  the  first  place  infant
puppies  should  be  fed  frequently,  every  care  being  at  the  same  time  taken
to  avoid  their  stomachs  being  overtaxed.  Then,  too,  it  must  be  remembered
that  even  the  best  of  cooked  food  is  apt  to  turn  sour  and  become  unwhole-
some'if  allowed  to  stand  too  long,  or  if  the  vessels  it  is  kept  in  are  not
perfectly  clean.  The  stomachs  of  young  puppies  are  so  easily  upset  that
too  much  care  cannot  be  exercised  in  the  preparation  of  their  food.  An
indigestible  diet  is  no  doubt  responsible  for  many  untimely  deaths  among
young  stock.
Provided  that  all  goes  well  with  the  whelps,  they  will  begin  to  crawl  about
soon  after  their  eyes  are  open,  which  will  be  at  the  age  of  nine  days.
When  the  pups  are  a  day  old  the  mother  should  be  encouraged  to  leave
them  for  an  hour's  daily  exercise;  but  this  should  never  be  of  a  violent
character,  likely  to  cause  milk  fever.
When  the  pups  ai«e  six  to  seven  weeks  of  age  the  weaning  should  com-
mence, and  it  is  a  good  plan  to  commence  this  by  removal  of  the  bitch  for
a  few' hours  at  first,  and  afterward  by  keeping  her  apart  the  whole  day,
only  permitting  her  to  he  with  the  family  at  night.  The  puns  should  then
be  fed  on  goat's  or  cow's  milk,  boiled,  with  one-third  as  much  warm  water
added  and  bread  crumbled  and  soak  in  it  and  given  while  still  slightly
warm.  I  prefer  condensed  milk  to  either,  which  is  sure  to  be  uniform  and
not  as  conducive  to  worms  as  cow's  milk.  This  should  be  slightly  reduced
with  warm  water.     After  a  few  days,  and  when  the  pups  have  taken  to  this
diet  a  little  meal  may  be  used  instead  of  bread;  oatmeal,  wheat  middlings
and  cornmeal,  mixed,  is  good;  and  in  case  of  looseness  of  the  bowels  a
little  rice  should  be  substituted.  At  this  period  it  is  also  well  to  add  a
little  lime  water  to  the  milk  or  give  fish  scraps,  for  this  supplies  phos-
phorous necessary  for  bone  forming.  If  fish  is  given  be  careful  and  sure
that  all  bones  are  first  removed.  Pups  thus  fed  rarely  get  rickets,  or  the
giving  way  of  the  pasterns  or  lower  leg  joints,  because  the  bone  is  not
strong  enough  to  carry  the  weight  of  the  body.  This  should  never  occur
in  any  well-regulated  kennel  where  the  pups  are  properly  nourished,  but  if
it  does,  two-thirds  of  lime  water  with  the  milk,  a  teaspoonful  of  cod  liver
oil  twice  daily,  or  more  if  the  breed  is  a  large  one,  will  soon  remedy  it.
After  awhile  soups  and  a  little  vegetable  matter  may  be  substituted.
I  give  puppies  when  weaning  them  boiled  milk  in  which  some  bread
has  been  well  mixed  and  soaked,  gravy  with  bread  mixed  in  it — chicken
gravy  they  eat  with  a  relish — and  a  little  later  on,  add  to  the  milk  and
bread,  or  gravy  and  bread,  just  a  little  cooked,  and  cut  up  fine,  beef  or  mut-
ton. Remember,  however,  that  after  a  pup  once  gets  a  taste  of  meat  tbat
it  is  very  liable  to  want  meat  and  refuse  anything  else.  See  article  on
Feeding.
In  case  of  the  mother  dying  a  few  days  after  birth  of  her  puppies,
always  use  condensed  milk  thinned  with  warm  water  and  add  lime  water
at  the. rate  of  a  teaspoonful  for  each  puppy.  Lime  water  is  one  of  the  best
worm  destroyers  for  young  puppies.
Should  a  mother  dog  lose  her  milk  or  not  have  enough  at  any  time
after  a  puppy  has  its  eyes  open,  make  a  gruel  of  corn  starch,  putting  a
little  sugar  in  it;  teach  the  little  fellows  to  eat  it,  which  can  be  readily  done
by  putting  their  noses  in  it  and  allowing  them  to  lick  their  lips,  and  you
will  find  them  to  soon  learn  to  like  it  and  thrive  on  it.  Or,  feed  them  with
Spratt's  Orphan  Puppy  Food,  as  mentioned  previously.
When  I  have  a  litter  of  puppies  that  are  weak  in  bone,  their  legs  not
strong  enough  to  sustain  the  body,  I  give  the  mother  three  times  a  day  until
pups  are  weaned,  some  precipitated  phosphate  of  lime  which  creates  bone.
Dose  for  toy  dogs,  a  pug  for  instance,  would  be  an  even  teaspoonful.  For
dogs  the  size  of  a  pointer,  one  and  a  half  teaspoonful,  and  for  large  breeds
like  a  St.  Bernard  or  mastiff,  two  teaspoonfuls.  Mix  the  lime  up  In  a  little
milk  and  all  bitches  will  readily  drink  it  down,  as  it  is  of  a  pleasant  taste.
Better,  however,  do  the  mixing  where  they  do  not  see  you,  for  if  they  got
the  idea  that  it  was  medicine  they  might  not  take  it.  Many  a  dog  will  run
and  hide  at  the  sight  of  a  spoon,  so  great  being  their  aversion  to  taking
medicine.
Other  troubles  sometimes  arise  at  this  time,  which  are  often  caused  by
worms,  but  still  more  frequently  result  from  unsuitable  food  or  foods  of
innocent  nature  that  have  undergone  noxious  changes,  and  still  oftener  by
overloading  the  stomach,  until  indigestion  sets  in  and  then  the  food,  Instead
of  supplying  nutriment,  becomes  an  irritant;  pains  arise,  swelling  of  the
organs  occur,  and  unless  quickly  relieved  the  pups  quickly  succumb.  These
symptoms  are  usually  attributed  to  worms,  which  frequently  cause  similar
troubles.  Another  difficulty  with  like  symptoms  is  a  slight  chill,  sending  the
blood  from  the  surface  to  the  internal  organs,  producing  congestion  therein,
and  it  is  sometimes  that  serious  disorders,  not  easily  distinguished  from
any  of  these,  are  caused  by  worm  remedies  being  given,  without  knowledge
of  their  effects,  or  due  preparation  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  All  these
troubles  may  be  classed  as  gastro-enteritis,  and  the  same  treatment  applied.
There  should  be  an  immediate  cleaning  out  of  the  bowels  with  castor  or
sweet  oil,  and  the  use  of  opiates  afterward  generally  give  best  results,
either  paregoric  or  laudanum,  the  former  preferred,  because  of  the  camphor
in  it.
The  opiate  should  be  given  every  hour,  until  the  pain  is  relieved,  and
then  nourishment  in  the  form  of  warm  milk  should  follow,  with  the  appli-
cation of  artificial  heat,  or  stimulation,  in  case  of  any  tendency  to  chill.
Raw  milk  should  never  be  given  to  any  puppies,  always  boil  or  scald
it.     Under  the  heading  of  "Worms,"  you  can  now  find  proper  treatment  for
puppies.
The  following  article  on  "Parturition,"  and  a  valuable  one  indeed — ■
coming  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  A.  J.  Sewell,  the  celebrated  English  dog  veter-
inarian, was  lately  published  in  the  American  Stock-Keeper,  and  I  herewith
reproduce  it:
"So  little  practical  knowledge  on  this  subject  is  abroad  in  our  kennels,
judging  from  the  large  number  of  dams  and  puppies  that  have  been  annu-
ally lost,  that  it  is  important  when  we  come  across  such  articles  as  Mr.  A.  J.
Sewell's,  the  noted  English  dog  'Vet.,'  on  the  above  subject,  that  others  than
the  readers  of  the  English  Kennel  Gazette  should  be  allowed  an  opportunity
to  read  them.  From  such  hints  the  intelligent  Kennel  man  may  prepare
himself  to  meet  emergencies  which  can  not  be  foreseen,  and  which  often
happen  when  a  'vet's'  services  are  not  immediately  available.  The  follow-
ing will  meet  such  cases:  "  'It  occasionally  happens  in  cases  of  head  pre-
sentation that  the  hind  legs  are  bent  forward  on  the  body,  which  renders  the
delivery  difficult,  and  without  the  passage  is  large  and  the  pains  are  very
strong,  the  bitch  cannot  bring  the  pup  without  assistance.  This  is  best
rendered  by  grasping  the  puppy  across  the  hips  with  a  small  pair  of  thin-
bladed  parturition  forceps,  and  by  gently  pulling  at  the  puppy  during  each
throe.
"  'It  frequently  occurs  that  though  a  puppy  may  lie  in  a  normal  position
the  mother  is  unable  to  give  birth  to  it,  in  consequence  of  its  being  too
large.  The  nose  may  be  just  inside  the  vagina,  and  there  become  fixed  in
spite  of  the  bitch  straining  for  hours.  I  have  seen  hundreds  of  such  cases.
It  is  a  mistake  to  leave  these  cases  too  long,  thinking  they  will  come  all
right,  as  it  is  wasting  time  and  the  mother's  strength;  and  if  there  are
other  puppies  to  some  she  probably  will  not  have  strength  either  to  expel
them  herself,  or  help  anyone  who  may  try  to  assist  her.
"'In  these  instances  the  head  is  so  firmly  fixed  in  the  mouth  of  the
womb  that  it  is  impossible  to  take  hold  of  it  with  forceps,  however  small
or  thin  the  blades  may  be,  but  the  hook  of  the  crochet  may  generally  be
passed  into  the  mouth  of  the  puppy,  and  by  fixing  it  well  into  the  pallet  a
good  hold  may  be  obtained,  and  the  puppy  drawn  through  the  passage  by
main  force.  If  care  be  taken  it  is  astonishing  what  amount  of  force  may
be  used  in  promoting  delivery  without  at  all  injuring  the  bitch,  but  it  is
best  not  to  pull  on  the  puppy  except  during  the  labor  pains,  if  there  are  any.
"  'It  is  the  custom  of  some  veterinary  surgeons  to  give  the  ditch  during
labor  a  hot  bath  if  the  parts  are  not  considered  sufficiently  relaxed  or  if
the  pains  are  dull;  at  the  proper  time  the  tissues  always  do  become  prop-
erly and  sufficiently  dilated,  providing  that  parts  are  in  a  normal  state —
that  is,  bar  a  stricture  in  the  vagina  or  something  of  that  kind — and  if
there  is  any  abnormal  condition  a  warm  bath,  in  my  opinion,  does  more
harm  than  good,  by  often  checking  the  pains.
"  'Sometimes  when  ergot  fails  to  induce  or  stimulate  the  throe — (here
is  where  I  mucJi  prefer  to  use  the  Fellows'  Compound  Syrup  of  Hypo-
phosphate) — I  irave  applied  with  advantage  to  the  abdomen  an  ice  bag;-  but
what  I  fteid  the  best  of  all  when  one  or  two  subcutaneous  injections  of  ergo-
tine  have  not  worked  satisfactorily,  is  to  put  the  bitch  in  some  vehicle  and
give  her  a  drive,  and  if  nothing  else  will  induce  the  labor  pains  this  will
do  so  in  most  cases.
"  'The  worst  cases  are  those  which  when  the  bitch  is  due  to  pup  and
the  parts  become  relaxed,  there  are  no  labor  pains  to  expel  the  fceta.  Ex-
amined per  vaginum  no  puppy  can  be  felt  and  no  amount  of  excitement  of
the  parts  by  passing  a  cold  instrument  into  the  passage  or  injection  of
ergot  will  cause  contraction  of  the  womb.  If  the  patient  seems  all  right
it  is  best  to  wait  some  hours,  during  which  time  everything  should  be  done
to  try  and  excite  contraction  of  the  parts.  If  the  means  taken  do  not
succeed,  then  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  except  the  Csesarean  operation,
as  it  is  not  safe  to  attempt  delivery  with  forceps  or  crochet  when  the  pup-
pies cannot  be  felt  with  the  finger.'
"Then  follows  a  description  of  the  Csesarean  operation,  which,  of  course,
no  one  but  an  experienced  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  allowed  to  perform;
so  it  is  not  necessary  to  give  it  here.
"Prolapsus  or  inversion  of  the  womb  or  uterus  into  the  vagina  some-
times, but  very  rarely,  occurs  during  parturition,  due  to  very  severe  strain-
ing, or  as  the  result  of  too  much  force  being  used  to  remove  a  puppy  with
forceps  or  by  other  artificial  means.  Care  must  be  taken  in  these  cases
not  to  mistake  protrusion  of  the  uterus  with  prolapsus  of  the  vagina,  or  a
polypus.  The  latter  may  be  recognized  as  a  solid  pear-shaped  body  with
a  narrow  neck,  whilst  a  prolapsed  vagina  is  generally  a  large  solid  oval
body  which  almost  fills  the  vaginal  canal  if  it  does  not  protrude  externally;
it  has  a  broad  base  and  rises  at  the  back  part  of  the  passage  just  behind
the  meatus  or  opening  of  the  bladder.  The  uterus  is  soft,  reducible,  and
rough  and  tubular  in  shape,  besides  showing  dark-colored  patches  where
the  placentae  have  been  attached.
"After  the  womb  has  been  cleansed  by  being  sponged  with  a  weak,
tepid  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid  or  permanganate  of  potash,  it  should,  if
possible,  be  returned  by  gentle  pressure  on  the  fundus  of  the  uterus  with  a
piece  of  whalebone  with  the  point  covered  with  sponge;  the  returning  is
assisted  if  the  hind  legs  are  raised  in  part  by  the  bitch  being  held  upside
down.  Care  must  be  taken  not  to  use  undue  force  or  the  uterus  may  be
ruptured.  After  the  return  it  is  a  good  plan  to  inject  a  quantity  of  cold
water  into  the  vagina  to  act  as  an  astringent.
"When  the  protruding  uterus  shows  signs  of  having  been  injured  or
is  much  congested,  or  decomposition  has  set  in,  amputation  is  advisable.
This  is  best  done  by  drawing  the  part  gently  out  and  applying  a  strong  lig-
ature as  high  up  as  possible  and  cutting  off  the  free  portion."
In  the  June  number  of  the  Kennel  Gazette  (Eng.)  Mr.  Sewell  takes  up
the  care  of  the  mother  and  puppies,  and,  judging  from  the  serious  losses
which  occur  in  almost  every  kennel  from  carelessness,  or  worse,  kennel
managers  cannot  read  the  following  too  carefully,  and  even  the  veterans
may  gain  a  wrinkle  or  two:
"When  the  bitch  has  finished  pupping  she  should  be  made  comfortable
by  renewing  her  bedding  and  given  some  warm  milk.  As  to  the  bedding,
there  is  nothing  better  than  straw,  laid  straight  across  the  box  and  changed
daily.  I  do  not  like  mats  or  cloths  even  for  small  dogs  in  these  cases,  for
they  become  so  quickly  foul.  When  the  bitch  has  had  a  large  litter  or
has  had  a  bad  time,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  beaten  up
with  milk  and  a  little  brandy;  or,  if  the  bitch  is  inclined  to  vomit,  some  beef
tea  or  Bovine — a  small  quantity  every  hour.  This  may  even  be  occasionally
given  before  the  bitch  has  finished  having  all  her  puppies,  if  she  appears
very  exhausted.  A  few  hours  later  in  ordinary  cases,  when  all  is  going
well,  some  thin  oatmeal  gruel,  which  is  the  best  food  for  the  next  two  or
three  days,  may  be  given.  When  the  bitch  seems  disinclined  to  take  suf-
ficient milk  gruel,  sheep's  head'  broth,  thickened  with  fine  oatmeal,  may
be  ordered,  and  even  bread  and  milk  or  gravy.  After  the  third  day,  more
.solid  food  may  be  given,  as  crushed  biscuit  or  boiled  rice,  with  sheep's  head
broth  and  .the  meat  from  the  bones  added;  also  a  little  fish,  and  if  the
bitiJh  is  not  feeding  well,  milk  may  be  given  to  drink  instead  of  water.  As
time  goes  on,  especially  when  there  is  a  large  litter,  more  nourishment  is
required,  and  the  food  must  be  increased  by  degrees  so  that  the  bitch
is  kept  in  fairly  good  condition,  though  of  course  not  made  fat,  or  the
secretion  of  milk  may  be  checked  and  the  puppies  will  suffer.
Some  bitches  are  so  zealous  in  their  care  of  the  puppies,  more  espe-
cially at  first,  that  their  health  suffers  in  consequence.  In  such  cases  the
dam  must  be  made  to  go  out  to  relieve  herself,  particularly  the  bladder.  I
have  seen  very  severe  cases  of  illness  caused  by  the  mother  not  leaving  her
puppies,  and  in  two  instances  death  was  the  result  of  the  bladder  becom-
ing over-distended  and  not  being  emptied.  The  condition  of  the  bowels
also  sometimes  requires  attention,  but,  as  a  rule,  when  the  bitch  has  been
allowed  to  follow  her  natural  desires  and  she  has  eaten  the  foetal  mem-
branes, the  bowels  are  often  relaxed  in  the  course  of  a  day  or  two,  and  so
long  as  it  is  not  severe,  no  notice  may  be  taken  of  it,  but  when  there  is much  purging  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  a  small  dose  of  castor  oil  to  carry
it  off  and  if  after  this  has  worked  off,  very  loose  motions  continue  and
are  frequently  passed,  some  carbonate  of  bismuth,  from  five  to  fifteen
grains  shaken  dry  on  the  tongue,  may  be  given  three  or  four  times  a  day.
In  these  cases  the  milk,  or  broth,  should  be  thickened  with  arrowroot  in-
stead of  oatmeal  so  long  as  the  bowels  continue  troublesome.
After  pupping,  a  bitch  naturally  has  a  great  deal  of  discharge  from
the  womb,  which  continues,  as  a  rule,  for  about  a  fortnight,  sometimes  a
good  deal  longer.  I  find  it  a  good  plan  when  the  last  puppy  is  born  to
syringe  the  uterus  out  with  a  tepid  solution  of  permanganate  of  potash.
When  the  discharge  is  very  copious  and  offensive,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  repeat
the  syringing  every  day  for  the  first  week;  and  the  coat  surrounding  the
passage,  when  the  bitch  does  not  keep  herself  clean,  should  be  washed  oc-
casionally with  warm  water  and  carbolic  soap  and  afterwards  carefully
dried.  —   *«««
When  the  discharge  from  the  passage  continues  after  three  weeks,
astringent  injections  are  necessary,  as  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  burnt  alum
dissolved  in  a  pint  of  tepid  water  and  repeated  morning  and  evening.
Occasionally,  after  the  usual  discharge  has  ceased,  a  bitch  will  have
a  blood-like  discharge,  the  same  as  is  seen  in  bitches  when  in  oestrum,  and