turning  his  head  every  few  moments  and  look  at  its  flanks.  When  stand-
ing the  tail  is  tucked  between  its  legs,  all  four  feet  are  drawn  in  toward
each  other,  and  the  back  is  arched.
Treatment. — Warm  comfortable  quarters  are  of  the  first  importance,
and  a  thick  woolen  jacket  carefully  padded  and  adjusted  over  the  belly,
chest  and  flanks  will  protect  the  parts  and  give  relief.  In  all  stages  of
the  disease  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  bowels  be  relieved  of
their  irritating  contents.
Give  injections  of  lukewarm  water  and  castile  soap — or  thin  oatmeal
water  containing  one  ounce  of  glycerine — until  the  lower  bowels  are  emp-
tied.
Then  give  a  dose  of  olive  oil  and  castor  oil,  in  equal  parts,  to  which
can  be  added  from  10  to  20  drops  of  laudanum  for  each  ounce  of  the  oils,
so  as  to  relieve  the  pain.
One  ounce  of  this  combination  of  oils  can  be  given  as  a  dose  to  a  40-lb.
dog.     Smaller  dogs  less  in  proportion  to  size.
"After  the  bowels  have  been  opened  to  further  allay  the  pain  give  to  a
40-lb.  dog  from  5  to  10  grains  of  chloral  with  from  5  to  30  drops  of  the
tincture  of  opium,  as  often  as  necessary.  The  diet  and  feeding  must  be
carefully  looked  to.  The  food  must  be  soft,  semi-liquid,  bland  and  unir-
ritating,  fed  only  a  small  quantity  at  a  time,  and  three  grains  of  pepsin
given  after  each  meal.
"Drink  must  be  allowed  only  in  very  small  quantities.  Milk  with  the
addition  of  lime  water  is  excellent.  If  there  is  a  tendency  to  vomit  give  the
subnitrate  of  bismuth  in  5  to  10  grain  doses,  three  times  a  day.  When
the  dog  begins  to  recover  from  the  disease  the  proportion  of  solid  food
can  be  increased,  and  a  good  tonic  condition  pill  will  facilitate  convales-
cence and  build  up  the  patient."
Eberhart's  tonic  pills,  or  Clayton's,  or  Sergeant's  condition  pills,  would
new  be  of  great  benefit,  used  for  a  few  weeks.
Back  Stiffness Usually  the  result  of  old  age,  chronic  rheumatism  or
lumbago,  but  sometimes  the  result  of  sprains,  a  blow  or  other  injury,  such  as
bt  ing  run  over  across  the  back.  The  patient  in  most  cases  walks  with
difficulty  or  may  start  out  all  right  and  in  the  best  of  spirits,  but  before
going  far  begins  to  lag,  loses  its  spirits  and  drops  its  tail.  In  most  cases
there  is  pain  evidenced  upon  pressure  being  applied  to  the  back.  In
other  cases  the  patent  can  walk  very  well,  but  is  unable  to  jump.  Treat-
ment consists  of  absolute  rest  and  the  use  of  a  good  liniment,  the  follow-
ing being  recommended:  Tincture  of  hyoscyamus  one-half  ounce,  chloroform
one-half  ounce,  spirits  of  camphor  one  ounce,  soap  liniment  one  ounce.
The  parts  should  be  massaged  and  this  liniment  applied  with  gentle  friction
twice  a  day.  It  is  also  advisable  to  give  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine  and
tu   feed  on  a  light  diet.
Bad  Breath.- — This  disgusting  condition  is  due  to  a  variety  of  causes,
chief  among  them  being  a  disordered  stomach,  the  result  of  worms  or  in-
digestion, and  a  diseased  condition  of  the  teeth,  which  is  more  or  less
dependent  upon  the  condition  of  the  stomach.  Diseases  of  the  lungs,  as
well  as  a  catarrhal  condition  of  the  nasal  passages,  also  affect  the  breath.
Remove  the  cause;  that  is,  if  the  stomach  is  out  of  order  treat  for  worms
and  use  a  good  condition  pill  until  the  digestive  processes  are  normal.  If
the  teeth  are  covered  with  tartar  remove  it  by  scaling  with  a  small  scraper,
such  as  dentists  use,  and  then  clean  with  an  ordinary  tooth  brush  and
dental  powder.  If  the  breath  remains  bad  after  the  teeth  have  been  cleaned
and  the  stomach  toned  up,  give  twice  a  day  for  a  week  two  to  ten  grains  of
salol.  If  there  is  a  catarrhal  discharge  from  the  nostrils  add  a  teaspoon-
ful  of  salt  to  a  ten-ounce  bottle  of  water  and  syringe  out  the  nostrils  twice
a  day  with  the  solution.
Balanatis. — This  disease  is  not  of  common  occurrence  and  consists
of  a  purulent  discharge  from  the  prepuce.  In  treating,  the  general  health
should  be  given  attention  and  the  diet  carefully  regulated.  Cleanliness  of
surroundings  is  also  important.  Feed  good  dog  cakes,  with  milk,  and  little
or  no  meat.     Internally  give  Fowler's  solution  of  arsenic  in  doses  of  from
two  to  fifteen  drops  three  times  a  day  after  feeding.  Cleanse  the  parts
with  tepid  water,  which  should  he  injected  into  the  prepuce  with  a  syringe,
and  then  syringe  out  the  prepuce  with  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  one
grain  to  the  ounce  of  water,  or  use  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid.
In  some  severe  cases  the  base  of  the  penis  is  diseased,  and  it  should  be
exposed  and  painted  with  a  four  per  cent  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  twice
a  week.
Bruises Where  there  is   much   swelling,   bathe  with   warm   water  for
an  hour,  dry  well  and  rub  in  the  following:
Liniment  for  Sprains,  Bruises,  Etc. — Take  equal  parts  of  spirits  of
turpentine,  liquid  ammonia  (not  the  strongest),  laudanum  and  rape  oil.  Mix
to  iorm  liniment.  If  skin  is  broken,  touch  the  wound  with  tincture  of  ben-
zoin and  rub  the  liniment  all  around,  but  not  into  the  broken  skin.
Burns  and  Scalds. — Mix  equal  parts  of  linseed  oil  and  lime  water  and
apply  freely  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  accident.  A  severe  burn  or  scald
is  sure  to  be  a  blemish  for  life,  and  if  severe  often  gives  a  violent  shock
to  the  system,  and  symptoms  of  illness  arising  from  it  should  be  observed
and  treated  according  to  circumstances.  Apply  the  above  oil  direct  to
the  wound  alone,  and  at  once  cover  thickly  with  cotton  wool  to  exclude
the  air  from  the  bladders  formed.  On  removing  the  dressing  prick  the
bladders  with  a  needle,  smooth  them  down  gently,  re-apply  the  dressing,
taking  care  that  no  hairs  are  left  on  the  sore  places.
Burns. — May  be  due  to  contact  with  fire,  but  more  frequently  it  is
boiling  water  that  has  caused  the  injury.  In  some  cases  the  skin  is
scorched  and  the  hair  frizzled,  but  the  hair  roots  are  not  destroyed  and  a
new  growth  soon  reappears.  In  other  cases  the  tissues  of  the  skin  are
destroyed,  the  hair  roots  killed  and  a  large  blister  forms,  which,  usually,
goes  through  a  stage  of  suppuration  and  then  heals,  leaving  a  smooth,
white,  glistening  scar  on  which  the  hair  never  grows.  If  the  skin  is  only
scorched  apply  three  or  four  times  a  day  the  common  lime  water  and  linseed
oil  lotion,  composed  of  one  part  of  lime  water  to  two  parts  of  linseed  oil.
This  relieves  the  pain,  protects  the  parts  from  the  air  and  in  a  few  days
the  patient  is  all  right.  In  those  cases  where  the  skin  has  been  burned
deeply  the  parts  should  be  coated  with  boracic  ointment.  After  the
blister  breaks  there  is  nothing  better  than  boracic  ointment  to  apply  to
the  raw  surfaces.  It  should  be  laid  on  thickly  and  protected  by  lint  or
absorbent  cotton,  kept  in  place  by  a  bandage.  The  dressing  should  be
repeated  three  times  a  day.
Baldness — Smooth-coated  toy  dogs  are  often  seen  with  hardly  any
coat.  Black  and  tan  toy  terriers  especially,  due  to  in-and-in  breeding.  It
can  also  be  the  result  of. deficient  nutritive  functions  and  debility.  Rub
the  bare  places  with  an  ointment  made  of —
Tincture  Cantharides    2    drams
Vaseline    .  .  : 3   ounces
Quinine    2  y2    grains
This  is  a  good  hair  grower,  but  here  is  where  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy
will  surely  do  the  work;  never  failing  as  a  hair  grower.  Clayton's  will  do
the  same  thing.
"Blain — Is  a  name  given  to  a  vesicular  swelling  of  the  tongue  along
the  sides  and  underneath.  It  comes  on  suddenly,  is  most  frequent  in  spring
and  summer,  and  appears  to  be  epidemic,  many  cases  occurring  in  the
same  neighborhood  at  the  same  time;  it  has  not  been  shown  to  be  contagious,
and,  although  it  is  not  a  fatal  disease,  it  is  a  very  troublesome  one.
"The  symptoms  appear  without  warning  and  apparently  without  cause.
The  first  thing  generally  observed  is  a  considerable  increase  in  the  flow
of  saliva,  which  dribbles  from  the  mouth.  The  breath  is  foetid,  and  on
examination  the  tongue  will  be  found  considerably  swollen,  while  if  the
disease  has  lasted  any  time  there  will  be  observed  large  livid  vesicles,  which
rupture,  leaving  ulcers;  these  ultimately  assume  a  gangrenous  form  and
discharge  foetid  matter  tinged  with  blood."
The  above  description  of  Blain  (malignant  sore  mouth)  I  quote  from
Dalziel.
I  have  never  had  a  case  of  this  trouble,  which  is  not  often  found  in
dogs.  The  following  was  written  on'  this  trouble  by  Dr.  C.  L.  Thulichum
for  Forest  and  Stream,  and  it  is  through  their  courtesy  that  I  publish  it:
"Causes  of  this  trouble  are  conjectural,  the  disease  is  most  prevalent
in  the  spring  and  summer,  and  more  frequently  found  in  the  southern  than
in  the  northern  latitudes.  I  do  not  -know  of  any  authority  who  assigns  any
particular  cause  for  this  trouble,  and  although  I  can  not  say  with  any
certainty  myself,  I  have,  however,  noted  the  following  conditions,
and  they  may  be  supposable  causes,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  go  on  record
as  asserting  that  they  are  the  actual  causes,  as  they  are  simply  deductions
of  my  own.
"I  was  located  in  the  South  in  practice  some  years  ago,  when  I  first
saw  a  case  of  this  trouble  in  the  dog.  At  that  time  I  had  on  my  hands
several  cases  of  anthrax  or  Texas  fever  in  cattle.  I  noted  that  whenever
I  found  a  case  of  this  trouble  in  the  dog  I  could  also  by  inquiry  find  that
in  the  neighborhood  some  one  had  not  long  before  lost  a  cow  from  the  cow
disease,  as  they  called  it.  As  the  dogs  were  allowed,  in  that  section,  to
run  at  large,  and  as  a  dog  is,  when  at  large,  more  or  less  of  a  scavenger,  I
concluded  that  either  the  dog  affected  had  found  the  carcass  of  the  cow
that  had  died  and  been  buried  and  dug  himself  up  a  meal  from  her,  or
that  following  that  very  desirable  habit  that  most  dogs  are  possessed  of,
rolling  in  carrion,  he  had  taken  a  roll  in  this  filth,  and  then  in  licking  him-
self afterward,  had  thus  infected  his  mouth  with  the  disease.  This  as-
sumption may  be  entirely  wrong,  but  I  give  it  for  what  it  is  worth  and  it
is  the  most  common  sense  cause  that  I  can  give  for  the  disease  in  the  section
in  which  I  met  it.  The  English  authorities  do  not  assign  any  cause,  simply
saying  that  the  attack  often  begins  without  any  apparent  or  previous  illness,
which  is  so;  the  attack  is  apparently  sudden,  your  dog  seems  well  today
and ^ tomorrow  has  a  very  sore  mouth.
"Symptoms. — Dog  may  be  a  little  listless  for  a  day  or  two,  which  may
not  be  noticed.     Next  and  noticeable  symptom  is  that  he  wants  to  drink  a
great  deal  of  water  and  drools  saliva  from  the  corners  of  the  mouth;
tongue  is  enlarged  and  thickened.  You  look  into  the  mouth  and  find  it
covered  on  its  sides  and  under  surface  with  large  vesicles  of  a  red  or  livid
color,  which  may  end  in  irregular  and  even  gangrenous  ulcers;  the  breath
is  extremely  offensive  and  discharge  of  salvia  very  great;  dog  will  not  eat
and  apparently  can  not  swallow,  but  this  is  a  mistake — he  can,  but  won't,
owing  to  the  great  soreness  of  the  mouth.  If  the  disease  is  not  checked
now  it  passes  on  to  the  bowels  and  the  dog  dies  with  severe  bloody  dis-
charges.
Treatment. — There  is  only  one  that  I  have  ever  found  necessary,  and  if
you  get  at  the  dog  promptly  before  the  bowel  trouble  commences  I  believe
you  will  affect  a  cure  in  every  case;  at  least  I  have.
"G-et  an  ounce  of  the  tincture  of  sanquinaria  canadensis  at  your  drug-
gist's and  a  camel's  hair  throat  pencil  or  swab  on  wire.  Paint  the  inside  of
the  mouth  and  tongue  where  affected  with  this,  morning  and  night,  and
give  a  tablet  of  bichloride  of  mercury,  one-hundredth  of  a  grain,  three
times  a  day  internally.  Feed  nothing  but  milk  for  several  days  after
cure  is  effected.  Buttermilk  is  one  of  the  finest  adjuncts  to  a  cure.  You
watch  the  dog  closely  and  don't  give  him  too  much  water,  not  until  he
suffers  from  the  lack  of  it,  but  so  that  he  will  be  thirsty  enough  to  drink  the
buttermilk  when  you  hand  it  to  him.  Have  it  as  cold  as  possible  and  give
him  a  soup  plate  full  three  times  a  day;  one  day  sweet  milk,  the  next  but-
termilk. After  he  is  well,  feed  him  for  some  time  boiled  rice  and  milk  and
buttermilk  and  bring  him  gradually  on  to  his  regular  feed.
The  above  treatment  I  have  found  to  put  the  mouth  in  such  shape
that  the  dog  will  take  nourishment  after  the  first  twenty-four  hours,  and
after  that  he  will  steadily  improve,  and  four  or  five  days  sees  the  mouth
entirely  healed  except  that  it  is  still  tender  to  solid  food.  To  a  dog  the
size  of  a  setter  or  hound  you  can  give  as  high  as  a  fiftieth  of  a  grain  at  a
dose  of  the  bichloride  of  mercury;  to  pups  and  smaller  breeds  one-hun-
dredth of  a  grain  is  enough,  and  in  fact  I  confine  myself  to  this  dose  with
all.  sized  dogs  under  St.  Bernards  or  mastiffs,  as  it  is  quite  as  effective  in
the  smaller  dose  as  in  the  larger."
Brain,  Inflammation  of  the  (Meningitis). — The  meingess,  the  mem-
branes enveloping  the  brain,  are  liable  to  inflammation.  Symptoms  are
great  drowsiness,  with  sudden  spasmodic  movements  of  the  muscles  of  the
head  and  chest  during  sleep.  The  disease  is  often  produced  by  fits.  In  this
and  other  brain  troubles  there  is  a  disposition  to  walk  in  circles,  always  to
one  side,  and  the  sight  is  so  affected  that  the  dog  runs  against  obstacles.
Treatment  by  the  amateur  is  of  no  avail;  call  in  a  good  veterinarian  or
your  family  doctor.
Blisters — See  general  remarks  under  heading  of  Medical  Terms.
Boils. — This  term,  being  in  common  use,  is  well  understood.  Boils
are  not  very  common  on  the  dog;  when  they  appear  a  poultice  of  some
kind  should,  if  practicable,  be  kept  constantly  applied,  in  order  to  bring
the  boil   quickly  to  a  head,  when   it  should   be  opened  with   a  lancet,   the
matter  well  squeezed  out  of  it,  the  part  well  washed  with  tepid  water,  and
then  dressed  with  the  following  ointment:  Turner's  Cerate  (Ceratum  cala-
mine), 1  oz.;  precipitated  chalk  and  glycerine,  and  carbolic  acid,  each  2
dr.;  mixed.  If  bicarbonate  of  soda — dose,  ten  grains  for  a  30  lb.  dog — be
given  three  times  a  day  it  will  check  the  tendency  to  form  boils.  Smaller
toy  dogs  use  five-grain  doses,  large  breeds  fifteen-grain  doses.
Blotch. — When  dogs  are  affected  with  blotch,  (Acute  Eczema),  in-
flamed patches  are  observed  on  various  parts  of  the  body;  these  discharge
thin  mattery  fluid,  which  forms  a  scab,  matting  the  hair  together,  which
in  a  few  days  falls  off,  leaving  bare  patches  moist  from  the  exuded  fluid.
These  will  appear  in  a  night,  and  need  cause  no  alarm  whatever.  Use  for
a  few  days,  'till  the  spots  are  dried  up,  a  powder  of  equal  parts  of  Boric
Acid,  bismuth  sub  nit,  and  oxide  of  zinc.  Dust  this  well  in  on  the  in-
flamed patches  twice  a  day.  After  dried  up  then  use  Eberhart's  skin
remedy  twice  a  day,  and  it  will  bring  the  hair  back  in  due  time.
Here  is  a  good  lotion  that  you  can  have  made  if  you  haven't  my  skin
remedy  on  hand:
Lotion  for  Blotch. — Take  carbolic  acid  and  glycerine  (British  Phar-
macopoeia), 1  oz.;  laudanum,  2  oz.;  water,  iy2  pts.;  carbonate  of  potash,
2  drs.  It  should  be  applied  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  skin  affected
twice   a    day.
A  bath  or  two,  except  in  cold  weather,  will  facilitate  a  cure,  using
Eberhart's,  or  some  good  dog  soap,  warm  water  to  which  add  a  teaspoonful
of  carbonate  of  soda,  and  the  dog  afterwards  very  carefully  dried.
Of  course,  the  kennel  must  be  examined,  any  defective  sanitary  arrange-
ments altered,  and  thorough  cleanliness  insisted  on.  The  dog's  bedding
should  be  changed  at  least  every  other  day,  and  the  proper  use  of  dis-
infectants in  and  about  the  kennel  are  of  great  use.
Breeding,  To  Prevent. — To  prevent  a  bitch  from  breeding  after  she
has  gone  astray,  accidentally  been  bred,  wash  out  the  womb  with  a  strong
solution  of  alum  and  water,  using  the  ordinary  syringe  with  the  female
point  adjusted.  The  sooner  this  is  done  after  the  act  of  coition  the  better.
It  will  often  prove  successful,  especially  if  the  bitch  is  in  the  early  stages
of  oestrum.  A  fairly  strong  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid,  with  5  gr.  of  sul-
phate of  zinc  to  each  ounce,  has  also  been  successfully  employed.
Another,  and  very  sure  thing  I  have  found  is,  as  soon  as  they  are
loose,  have  syringe  ready,  filled  with  pure  cider  vinegar,  say  half  a  tea-
cup, hold  bitch's  hind  parts  up  and  inject  this  in  the  vagina.  The  super-
matazoa  can  not  live  in  any  acid  solution.  The  injection  should  be  quickly
done,  after  they  are  apart.
Bronchocele. — This  is  an  enlargement  of  the  thyroid  glands,  the  prin-
cipal cartilage  of  the  larynx.     See  Goitre.
Bronchitis. — This  is  an  inflammation  of  the  bronchial  tubes  or  wind
pipes  that  convey  the  air  to  the  lungs,  the  upper  portion  called  the  larynx.
It  is  caused  by  exposure  to  damp  and  cold,  neglecting  a  common  cold,  of
being  kenneled  where  foul  emanations  are  breathed.  Excessive  barking,
as  dogs  often  do  at  their  first  bench  show,  will  cause  a  slight  inflammation
of  the  larynx.  When  the  larger  air  pipes  are  only  affected,  the  cough
is  a  short,  dry,  intermittent  one  at  first,  but  in  a  few  days  it  becomes  more
frequent  and  moist,  mucus  is  discharged  from  the  nose  and  coughed  up  as
well.  When  the  smaller  brancnes  are  attacked  the  cough  is  more  severe,
there  is  a  constant  wheezing,  and  frothy  matter  tinged  with  blood  is  ex-
pectorated; the  breath  is  hot,  mouth  and  nose  dry  and  hot,  the  tongue
is  parched,  the  pulse  is  weak  and  considerably  increased,  eyes  are  red
and  inflamed,  the  discharge  from  the  nose  becoming  thick  and  copious,  and
the  dog  suffers  from  violent  sneezing.
Treatment. — Put  the  dog  in  a  room  tolerably  warm,  one  with  a  fire  in
it  is  best,  where  a  tea-kettle  is  kept  boiling,  as  the  steam  thus  distributed
throughout  the  room  is  very  beneficial,  but  ventilation  is  also  essential.
A  room  with  a  fireplace  in  it  would  insure  this.  Give  the  dog  one  dose
of  from  three  to  five  grains  of  true  James'  Powder.  As  a  mild  laxative,
give  a  dose  of  castor  oil.  For  food,  give  broths  or  porridge,  with  -bits  of
boiled  liver  added.
Where  there  is  an  accumulation  of  phlegm,  and  the  animal  endeavors
to  dislodge  it,  dive  a  dessertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  of  ipecacuanha
wine  to  act  as  an  emetic.  This  will  greatly  relieve  the  patient.  If  the
cough  is  troublesome,  give  from  a  dessertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  of  the
following  twice  a  day:
Liquor  morphise  mur    2   drams
Spirit  of  ether  sulp.  co    2   drams
Tincture  of  camphor  co 3   drams
Ipecacuanha  wine    1   dram
Water   to   make    3   ounces
Or  3  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  benzoic  aid  will  relieve  the  cough.  Apply  hot  linseed
poultices  to  the  chest  and  sides,  and  always  place  a  coat  upon  the  dog.  A
woolen  cloth  or  blanket  will  do  for  this,  covering  his  chest  and  around  his
body  two-thirds  towards  rear,  fastened  with  safety  pins.
The  following  medicine,  in  the  form  of  a  thin  electuary,  should  then
be  administered  to  the  patient   every  three   hours:
Electuary  for  Bronchitis  and  Sore  Throat:
Chlorate   of  potash    3  drams
Wine   of  ipecacuanha    3  drams
Tincture  of  opium 2  drams
Powdered   licorice  root    %  ounce
Powdered  gum  acacia    %  ounce
Honey     1  ounce
Vinegar  of  squills y2  ounce
Mix  and  give  to  small  dogs,  up  to  2  5-lb.  weight,  half  a  teaspoonful
every  three  hours,  and  to  large  dogs  a  teaspoonful  as  a  dose.     Shake  bottle
well  before  giving,  as  these  ingredients  have  a  tendency  to  separate.  It
should  be  placed  well  back  on  the  tongue  and  should  be  swallowed  gradually.
Is  is  sometimes  advisable  to  blister  the  throat  and  front  of  the  chest,
and  in  most  cases  a  good  rubbing  with  a  strong  stimulative  liniment  will
be  of  service.     Vinegar  and  mustard  may  be  used,  or  the  following  mixed:
Spirits  of  turpentine 1  y2    ounce
Oil  of  origanum    1   ounce
Tincture  of  cantharides    \'2    ounce
Spirit   of   hartshorn    1   ounce
Rape    oil     2   ounces