Ergot  of  Kye Useful  in  cases  of  protracted  parturition.  Five  to  fifteen grains  may  be  given  in  a  little  warm  water  with  a  teaspoonful  of  brandy
added.     The  dose  repeated  in  an  hour  if  needed.
Ether,  Spirit  of  Nitrous  (Sweet  Spirit  of  Nitre). — Diaphoretic  and
diuretic.     It  is  given  in  distemper,  fevers,  influenza,  etc.
Feeding. — Here  is  an  important  subject  which  should  be  well  understood.
No  dog  over  six  months  old  should  ever  have  over  two  meals'  per  day,  and
regularity  in  eating  is  just  as  important  in  dogs  as  it  is  in  human  beings.
Dogs  should  have  plain  food,  but  don't  be  afraid  of  giving  them  some  meat
once  a  day,  cooked,  and  cut  up  small,  avoiding  fat,  and  also  not  feeding
veal  or  pork,  neither  of  which  are  good  for  dogs,  beef  and  mutton  are  both
good — we  eat  meat  every  day,  and  why  not  our  dogs.  Never  feed  lights,  not
digestible,  and  you  might  as  well  feed  leather.  Cooked  liver  is  always  rel-
ished by  a  clog,  and  once  a  week  of  cooked  liver  is  a  treat,  it  also  acting  as
a  laxative,  but  not  much  nourishment  in  liver  and.  a  dog  fed  too  much  liver
would  not  thrive,  gain  much  flesh,  or  keep  in  good  condition.  Now  as  to
milk — I  don't  go  much  on  too  much  sweet  milk,  don't  think  it  is  good  for  a
dog,  and  if  given  milk  daily,  would  soon  get  very  tired  of  it.  Sour  milk
once  in  a  while,  is  better.  Buttermilk  is  better  yet,  and  in  summer  time
I  give  my  dogs  all  around,  some  buttermilk  as  an  "extra.'  once  a  week.  As
to  feeding,  I  am  writing  now  as  to  the  older,  or  matured  dogs,  and  not  as
to  the  puppies,  as  to  their  feeding  being  advised   upon   elsewhere.
I  have  on  an  average  of  seventy-five  dogs  in  my  kennel,  and  here  is
their  bill  of  fare.  For  breakfast,  winch  is  served  about  seven  o'clock  in
summer  and  eight  o'clock  in  winter,  they  get  Spratt's  Patent  Dog  Cakes  for
their  breakfast,  fed  dry.  but  broken  up  into  small  pieces  (excepting  to  young
puppies  that  yet  require  soft  food  and  to  be  fed  oftener  than  twice  a  day).
This  I  break  up  with  a  hammer  on  the  board  walk  in  their  yards,  or  in
wet  weather,  on  the  kennel  floor,  spreading  it  out  so  the  dog's  don't  get  to
fighting.  I  let  them  all  pitch  in  and  cat,  which  they  do  with  a  relish,  and
why  shouldn't  they?  It  is  a  prepared  food  for  dogs,  composed  of  beef,  flour,
oatmeal,  bone  meal,  etc.,  in  fact  articles  that  a'dog  needs.  When  your  pup-
pies' teeth  are  developed  sufficiently  then  they  can  have  it,  but  broken  up
smaller.  Spratt's  Patent  make  a  special  prepared  Puppy  Cake,  which  is
more  suitable  for  the  youngsters.  See  their  page  advertisement  in  front  of
book,  or  I  can  furnish  you  with  it.
Spratts  now  Kibble  their  dog  cakes,  run  them  through  a  machine,  so
they  are  about  the  size  of  a  hickory  nut,  and  this  saves  the  trouble  of  break-
ing it  up — the  dogs  like  it,  although  some  of  my  larger  dogs  will  take  a
whole  cake  and  chew  it  up  like  a  bone.
As  a  rule,  it  is  best  to  feed  it  dry,  although  occasionally  it  is  a  good
plan  to  moisten  it  with  either  hot  or  cold  water  or  with  soup.  Dry,  it
serves  the  purpose  of  a  bone  and  good  for  cleaning  teeth,  sweetening  breath
and  is  digestible.  I  let  my  dogs  eat  about  what  they  want  for  breakfast,
but  if  any  is  left,  don't  let  it  lay,  but  pick  it  up  and  save  for  next  morning,  in
action  it  is  a  perfect  regulator,  and  its  use  will  give  a  dog  a  good  coat,  a
clean  breath  and  sound,  handsome  teeth.  Until  supper  time,  about  five
o'clock,  they  get  nothing,  and  this  is  as  it  should  be.  The  F.  H.  Bennett
Biscuit  Co.  (see  their  advertisement),  make  a  very  good  dog  cake,  called
Maltoid  Milk — Bone,  made  in  the  shape  of  a  bone,  and  I  have  used  this
also,  and  the  dogs  like  it.  Now  as  to  supper,  the  main  meal,  as  it  should
be  for  a  dog,  here  is  the  bill  of  fare  as  fed  for  years  in  my  kennel.  I  get
meat  sent  out  from  my  butcher  in  Cincinnati  daily,  beef,  mutton,  and  some-
times, a  sheep  or  calves  head  or  two  and  a  big  lot  of  fresh  bones,  and  my
man  cooks  this  up  in  a  big  kettle,  then  cuts  the  meat  up  into  small  pieces
and  trims  the  bones  down  some,  then  in  the  soup  we  put  Conner's  Cooked
Dog  Food,  which  is  a  cereal,  (see  their  advertisement),  and  makes  a  medium
thick  mush.     Now  when  feeding  time  comes  for  supper,  each  dog  is  fed  a
pan  of  this  mush  in  which  is  put  some  of  the  cut-up  cooked  meat,  and  this
well  mixed  or  stirred  up  in  the  mush,  so  the  dog  can't  pick  out  just  the
meat.  After  supper,  then  the  hones,  every  dog  getting  one  or  two  to  gnaw
on — as  their  desert,  and  they  all  love  a  hone  to  chew  up,  which  is  good
for  all  dogs.  If  any  chicken  bones,  or  small  bones  that  they  would  be  likely
to  split  up  and  make  slivers  of,  these  are  put  in  the  stove,  as  they  are
dangerous.  The  soup  is  occasionally  varied  by  adding  to  the  cooking  of  the
meat,  vegetables,  but  which  are  hard  to  get  here,  and  this  adds  a  relish  to
it.  You  must  use  your  judgment  as  to  how  much  meat  to  give  each  dog,
some  dogs  that  are  too  fat,  and  too  greedy,  must  not  be  given  all  they
would  eat.  If  a  dog  leaves  any  of  his  meal  in  his  pan,  don't  let  it  remain
there  to  get  stale,  but  gather  it  up.  -Quite  a  lot  of  the  dogs,  those  I  can
depend  on  to  not  fight  at  meal  time,  are  fed  together  in  the  main  yard
from  traps  or  larger  pans.  Pans  are  all  gathered  up  and  washed  that  night
so  as  to  be  sweet  and  clean  for  next  day — cleanliness  very  important  always.
Now  comes  the  "dessert" — the  bones,  which  we  throw  out  in  the  yards  so
that  each  one  has  a  large  bone  to  gnaw  on — and  don't  they  enjoy  this.  We
watch  them  while  they  are  at  the  bones,  where  "the  push"  are  together,  to
guard  against  fights  that  might  occur,  as  dogs,  like  some  children,  are  sel-
fish and  greedy,  and  try  to  take  the  other  dog's  bone  from  him.  Generally,
a  word  from  me  will  stop  this  trouble,  but  if  not  there  is  a  whip  handy  and
it  is  properly  used  to  quell  the  disturbance  promptly.  Chicken  bones,  or
any  small  bones  like  from  a  lamb  chop,  are  very  dangerous — bones  that
they  can  chew  up  into  slivers;  as  you  must  know  that  all  such  must  pass
down  and  through  all  the  intestines,  which  means  a  dangerous,  risky  trip,
as  it  is  not  straight,  but  a  very  winding  and  crooked  one,  the  great  danger  in
this  sliver,  if  it  passes  through  the  throat,  is  in  puncturing  or  getting  lodged
in  its  trip  through,  which  would  mean  death  to  the  dog.  Burn  all  your
Chicken  Bones  excepting  the  necks.
Vegetables  and  rice  mixed  in  the  mush  you  have  made  are  very  good
for  a  change,  and  the  bill  of  fare  can  be  thus  varied  once  a  week  or  so,
which  will  be  appreciated  by  the  dog.  Carrots  and  beets  are  the  beat  to
use,  cabbage  not  agreeing  with  all  dogs;  potatoes  are  too  fattening  and
possess  very  little  nourishment.  A  baked  sweet  potato  is  relished  by  dogs,
but  the  same  objection  applies  here,  besides  leaving  a  sweet  taste,  and  dogs
should  never  have  anything  sweet.
All  dogs  should  have  more  or  less  hard  feed  two  or  three  times  a  week
at  any  rate,  a  bone  or  a  biscuit,  or  something  they  can  use  their  teeth  upon
and  not  bolt.  A  dog's  teeth  are  just  as  Important  to  its  continued  well-
being  as  those  of  a  human  being,  and  as  we  cannot  provide  our  four  footed
friends  with  a  false  set,  every  care  should  be  exercised  in  order  to  preserve
the  teeth.
Of  vegetables,  onions,  carrots,  turnips,  beet  root,  and  a  few  potatoes
are  the  most  nutritious  and  fat  forming.  Cabbages  and  similar  kinds  are
good  for  the  blood,  but  contain  few  positive  properties.  Oatmeal  is  fatten-
ing but  heating;  rice  forms  an  ideal  food  for  toys,  being  very  easily  digested,
satisfying,  but  not  too  stimulative;  pearl  barley,  sago,  tapioca,  and  semolina
may  all  be  made  use  of  as  changes.  If  you  do  use  milk,  see  it  is  fresh,  and
then  boil  it.  Milk,  in  combination  with  other  material,  as  for  instance  in  the
way  of  a  rice  or  bread  pudding,  would  be  all  right,  or,  used  with  eggs.
Eggs  are  especially  useful  when  nourishment  has  to  be  given  with  a
spoon.  Cooked  liver  is  not  a  bad  thing  to  mix  in  the  food  once  in  awhile,
but  not  oftener  than  once  a  week.
Cornmeal  much  or  baked  corn  bread  for  a  change  in  winter  is  all  right,
but  much  too  heating  to  the  blood  in  summer.  Candy,  cake,  or  anything
sweet  or  too  greasy  should  never  be  given  a  dog — you  might  just  as  well
give  them  poison  in  small  doses.  Many  a  dog  has  died  before  its  time  due
to  this  mistaken  kindness  of  its  master  or  mistress.  When  darling  Fido  so
frightens  his  mistress  with  that  low  moan,  succeeded  by  that  painful  and
prolonged  howl,  with  his  back  arched,  his  feet  tucked  in  towards  each  other,
and  vainly  trying  every  possible  posture  to  escape  the  pain,  he  is  merely
suffering  the  natural  result  of  that  last  lump  of  sugar.     True,  Fido  may
have  had  sugar  frequently  without  suffering  in  this  way,  hut  the  last  lump
is  the 'straw  that  breaks  the  camel's  back;  and  no  surprise  need  be  felt  if
persistence  in  the  kindly-meant  but  objectionable  practices  induces  repeated
attacks  of  colic,  ending  in  inflammation  and  death.
I  have  been  called  in  many  a  time  to  see  a  sick  dog  that  was  in  misery
due  solely  to  improper  and  over-feeding,  but  could  do  it  no  good,  for  it
was  so  fat,  asthmatical  and  wheezy  that  it  could  hardly  walk  or  get  its
breath;  no  medical  skill  could  avail  and  the  pet  had  to  die — not  its  fault,
but  its  owner's.  Take  my  advice  and  warning — don't  feed  your  pet  these
poisons  every  time  it  begs  you,  perhaps  by  "sitting  up"  or  "speaking,"  but
treat  it  with  true  kindness  by  feeding  as  I  have  advised,  and  never  oftener
than  twice  a  day.  Always  keep  clean,  fresh  water  handy,  and  in  summer
see  that  it  is  never  exposed  to  the  sun.  Eggs  are  good  for  dogs,  but  I  have
found  that  in  cases  of  a  sick  dog  with  a  weak  stomach  very  few  of  them
can  hold  it  down.  Chicken  gravy,  or  the  gravy  with  a  little  flour  in  it,  as
the  wife  makes  it  in  stewing  chicken  giblets,  is  often  accepted  by  a  sick  dog
after  refusing  everything  else  that  has  been  offered  it.
A  sick  dog  will  sometimes  eat  a  stewed  beef  kidney.
If  you  feed  potatoes,  feed  mashed  potatoes,  as  these  the  dog  can  digest
easier.  If  you  have  only  one  dog,  get  him  used  to  eating  dog  cakes  dry,
for  his  breakfast,  and  for  his  supper,  you  may  have  enough  left  from  your
lunch  and  dinner  for  the  one  dog,  and  that  bone  from  the  porterhouse  steak,
or  from  the  roast,  will  be  appreciated  by  him.
Quite  a  valuable  article  is  the  following,  taken  from  American  Fancier
and  Stock-keeper,  as  to  feeding  of  Toy  Dogs.  In  it  are  good  ideas,  especially
applicable  to  dogs  at  bench  shows,  but  good  to  adopt  even  for  dogs  at  home.
"The  proper  way  to  feed  toy  dogs  is  an  everlasting  subject  of  debate
where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  show  corners.  There  is  no
proper  way  per  se.  The  question  of  suitable  feed  all  depends,  both  upon
the  breed  and  the  individual.  Sloppy  food,  for  toys  as  well  as  in  the  inter-
ests of  bigger  dogs,  must  be  avoided,  and  food  that  is  solid  and  somewhat
concentrated  is  indicated.  In  the  case  of  Pomeranians  and  other  long  coated
dogs  stronger  food  is  more  desirable  than  for  smooths.  That  is,  the  drain
of  the  coat  on  the  dog's  system  must  be  met.  Likewise  the  nervous  energy
of  these  small  dogs  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  Pomeranian,  for
instance,  will  wear  himself  to  a  shadow  much  sooner  than  the  easy  going
pug  or  toy  spaniel.  In  the  former's  case  a  diet  varied,  digestible  and  nutri-
tious, much  in  a  little,  is  the  proper  thing,  and  nothing  is  better  than  under-
done (rare),  roast  beef  and  chicken,  which  to  vary  the  diet  may  be  alternated
with  fresh  tripe  and  white  fish,  from  which  all  bones  must  be  taken  out.
Pet  dogs,  whose  vigorous  constitutions  and  active  appetites  call  for  a
greater  bulk  of  food,  should  be  fed  on  boiled  rice  or  crumbled  stale  bread
in  conjunction  with  the  meat,  the  meat  being  fed  last.  It  is  not  good  to
fill  these  little  gluttons  out  with  milk  or  as  much  meat  as  they  will  eat.
Plain  rice  is  not  heating  and  does  not  fatten  like  meals.  Should  a  toy  dog
take  to  the  dog  biscuit  these  may  also  be  given  chopped  dry.
"A  great  many  toy  dogs  suffer  more  or  less  from  cankered  teeth  brought
on  by  fermentation  in  the  stomach,  in  most  cases  due  entirely  to  an  indiscreet
diet  of  sloppy,  sweet  foods.  Eschew  all  these  and  bring  the  little  chaps
down  to  a  dry,  hard  diet  if  possible,  or  a  diet  which  will  make  them  chew
and  not  lap  or  bolt  their  foods.  Nature  provided  the  dog  in  its  natural
state  with  a  stomach  that  would  digest  nails,  as  the  saying  goes,  but  civili-
zation has  altered  all  this  for  the  pet  dog,  as  well  as  his  owner,  and  modern
excesses  work  their  ills  on  both.     So  the  different  conditions  must  be  met."
The  following  written  by  Dent,  is  especially  intended  to  apply  as  to
Feeding  of  Hunting  Dogs:
"The  dog  is  a  carniverous  animal,  and  although  domestication  and
association  with  man  have,  in  some  respects,  altered  or  affected  his  organs
of  digestion,  he  thrives  best  upon  a  mixed  diet  or  one  containing  both  meat,
grain  and  vegetables.  The  proportions  of  these  depend  altogether  upon  the
individual's  constitution,  peculiar  existing  state  of  health,  and  the  work  he
is  called  upon  to  do.    These  matters  can  only  be  determined  by  experiment
and  observation.  Food  and  water  are  to  the  muscular  system  what  fuel  and
steam  are  to  the  locomotive.  Muscular  exertion  calls  for  a  destruction  of
muscular  elements;  the  destruction  of  muscular  elements  generates  heat  in
varying  degrees  and  a  large  amount  of  effete  poisonous  matter  that  the  kid-
neys and  bowels  are  called  upon  to  remove.
"If  the  clog  is  in  good  condition,  the  muscles  firm,  elastic  and  properly
nurtured  by  a  fit  diet,  muscular  effort  will,  if  severe,  produce  only  the
minimum  amount  of  heat  and  effete  matter.  If  the  animal  is  in  poor  condi-
tion, the  muscles  soft  and  flabby,  surrounded  by  fat,  slight  exercise  will
consume  a  large  amount  of  this  tissue  and  produce  a  corresponding  amount
of  heat  and  waste  products.  And  it  is  these  poisonous  waste  products  that
the  athlete,  horse  and  dog  have  to  contend  with,  and,  no  matter  how  carefully
trained  it  is,  these  waste  products  eventually  limit  their  performance.
"A  dog's  wind  may  be  all  right,  he  is  ready  to  go  and  wants  to  go,
but  if  the  production  of  these  waste  products  is  too  rapid  for  their  removal
by  the  kidneys  and  other  organs,  they  remain  in  the  system  and  partially
paralyze  the  nerves  controlling  the  muscles  and  they  refuse  to  act.
"The  fat  or  muscle-making  possibilities  of  various  foods  and  the  ani-
mal's actual  condition  can  be  studied  very  intelligently  by  the  use,  after  ex-
ercise or  work,  of  a  small  clinical  thermometer.  When  the  maximum  amount
of  work  short  of  actual  exhaustion  produces  the  minimum  degree  of  heat
as  registered  by  the  thermometer,  the  animal  is  in  the  best  condition  and
the  foods  that  will  afford  these  results  are  the  foods  to  be  adopted,  and  the
foods  that  produce  the  largest  amount  of  heat  for  a  given  amount  of  work
are  to  be  avoided,  as  a  general  working  system.
"It  can  be  laid  down  that  the  quantity  of  meat  can  be  reduced  during
the  close  season  and  increased  during  the  working  season  to  almost  an  all-
meat  diet  with  satisfactory  results.  Oatmeal  and  unbolted  wheat  flour  are
the  most  desirable  of  grains.  Wheat  dour,  rye  or  barley  shorts  should
be  baked  as  bread  pones  and  allowed  to  cool  and  afterward  broken  up  and
softened  with  meat  liquor,  soup  or  milk.  Cornmeal  is  a  popular  food  with
trainers,  probably  on  account  of  its  price,  ease  of  obtaining  and  preparing,
but  it  is  a  fat  producer  and  not  a  muscle  builder.  No  horse  trainer  would
feed  it  to  a  thoroughbred  when  conditioning  him  for  a  race,  and  while
trainers  may  feel  satisfied  with  the  way  their  dogs  thrive,  I  am  sure  they
would  be  capable  of  greater  muscular  effort  if  fed  on  one  of  the  other  grains.
"A  very  good  way  of  preparing  food  for  a  siring  of  dogs  is  to  purchase
a  few  sheeps'  heads,  a  couple  of  beeves'  heads,  or  a  liver  or  two,  or  twenty
or  thirty  pounds  of  chucks  or  neck  pieces  chopped  fine.  Boil  the  heads  in  a
kettle  until  they  are  thoroughly  cooked,  and  the  meat  can  easily  be  scraped
from  the  bones.  This  meat  should  then  be  chopped  or  shredded  into  small
pieces  and  mixed  with  from  three  to  six  times  its  weight  of  whole  wheat
flour,  rye  or  corn  meal,  softened  and  worked  up  with  soup  liquor.  To  this
may  be  added  enough  black  molasses  to  slightly  sweeten  the  whole  and
then  it  is  to  be  thoroughly  baked  over  a  slow  fire  and  afterward  allowed
to  not  only  cool,  but  partially  dry,  in  which  condition  it  will  keep  indefi-
nitely. When  it  is  to  be  fed,  break  it  up  into  pieces,  and  feed  dry  or  soften  it
with  meat  or  vegetable  soup.  This  food  can  also  be  improved  by  adding
vegetables,  such  as  carrots,  turnips,  beets,  onions  or  cabbage,  in  the  propor-
tion of  one  pound  of  vegetables  to  from  five  to  ten  pounds  of  meat  and
grain.
"The  sportsman  owning  only  one  or  two  dogs,  who  will  condition  his
dogs  on  food  prepared  in  this  way,  and  who  will  carry  with  him  a  suffi-
cient quantity  to  provide  for  his  dogs  while  on  a  hunting  trip,  will  be  amply
repaid  by  their  superior  condition,  and  he  will  never  go  back  to  the  make-
shift diet  of  table  scraps  that  is  too  often  resorted  to.
"Dog  biscuits  simplify  the  feeding  problem  and  the  professional  trainer
or.  sportsman  who  uses  them  as  a  staple  diet  can  go  on  an  extended  hunting
trip  or  even  to  remote  sections  of  the  country,  where  there  are  no  conven-
iences for  preparing  food,  and  feel  sure  of  his  dog  having  a  properly  bal-
anced ration.  The  ordinary  dog  biscuit  contains  only  a  small  proportion  of
meat,   hardly  sufficient  for  a  dog  during  the  close  season.     When  hunting
or  training  it  is  advisable  to  have  a  special  biscuit  prepared  with  the  pro-
portion of  meat  doubled  or  trebled,  or  feed  fresh  meat  in  addition  to  the
regular-biscuit.
"The  number  of  meals  a  dog  should  be  given  daily  is  a  matter  fre-
quently discussed.  I  prefer  to  give  a  light  meal  in  the  morning  (fed  dry),
such  as  two  or  three  dog  biscuits  or  their  equivalent,  and  a  full  meal  at
night.  The  morning  meal  should  be  given  at  least  one  hour  before  the  dog
is  put  down  in  the  field,  so  as  to  enable  the  stomach  juices  to  partially  digest
it.  Under  no  circumstances  should  a  dog  be  worked  directly  after  feeding
a  full  meal.  The  stomach,  like  all  muscles  and  organs,  requires  during
action  an  increased  blood  supply.  During  exercise  the  blood  is  drawn  from
the  stomach  and  other  internal  organs  to  other  parts  of  the  body  and  the
food,  instead  of  being  digested,  lies  as  a  heavy  load  with  a  liability  to  fer-
ment and  produce  diarrhea  or  dysentery  that  will  incapacitate  the  animal.
Table  scraps  and  'pick  ups,'  if  clean  and  fresh,  free  from  fat  and  grease
(they  seldom  are),  may  be  tolerated  for  house  or  pet  dogs,  but  the  sports-
man who  attempts  to  take  his  dog  through  a  hard  season's  hunting  on  such
food  is  blind  to  his  own  and  his  dog's  interests."
Feeding  Puppies. — Now  as  to  feeding  of  puppies.  As  soon  as  they  are
weaned,  which  should  be  done  gradually,  and  which  you  will  find  under
head  of  "Breeding,"  their  food  should  consist  of  boiled  or  scalded  milk
(never  feed  raw  milk  to  puppy)  in  which  soak  some  bread.  Potatoes  and
gravy,  bread  and  gravy,  and  soups  with  plenty  of  vegetables  in,  such  as
carrots,  turnips,  beets  and  rice.  Chicken  gravy  or  the  gravy  from  stewed
giblets  in  which  some  flour  has  been  added,  is  a  very  nourishing  and  fa-
vorite food  for  puppies.  If  the  scalded  milk  is  found  to  be  too  constipating,
add  some  oatmeal  porridge  to  thicken  it.  When  he  is  cutting  his  teeth,
crumbs  of  toast,  hard  cracker  or  crusts  of  stale  bread  are  needed.  No  one
cares  to  eat  the  outside  slice  of  a  loaf,  so  that  may  be  made  stale,  hard,  and
broken  up  for  the  liUle  dog,  well  soaked  in  the  soup  or  milk.  Spratt's
Patent  makes  a  special  puppy  biscuit  that  is  very  good  to  feed  to  the  young-
sters as  soon  as  their  teeth  will  admit  of  chewing  same,  which  biscuit
should  be  broken  up  into  small  pieces.  You  can  also  feed  this  softened  in
soup.  When  the  puppy  is  about  up  to  three  months  old,  1  would  then  give
this  biscuit  for  one  meal  a  day,  fed  dry  but  broken  into  small  pieces.  A
very  little  cooked  beef  and  mutton,  cut  up  very  fine  can  now  be  given
mixed  in  with  their  other  foods,  and  some  of  the  mush  of  stale  bread  (see
article  on  Feeding)  will  be  all  right  to  give  them,  in  which  you  can  mix
thoroughly  the  finely  cut  up  meat,  but  not  too  much  meat  until  a  little
older.  Puppies  up  to  three  months  of  age  should  be  fed  four  times  a  day
and  then  gradually  cut  down  to  three  meals  a  day,  which  will  generally  be
often  enough  to  feed  until  they  get  to  be  from  four  to  five  months  old.  At
six  months  old,  or  about  there,  I  put  them  on  the  regular  bill  of  fare  with
the  grown  dogs,  excepting  that  their  portion  of  cooked  meat  is  not  so
liberally  dealt  out  at  supper,  but  the  large  bones  they  have  free  access  to
with  the  older  dogs.  I  don't  believe  in  keeping  a  puppy  on  a  milk  diet  too
long,  and  think  it  best  to  break  them  off  from  this  when  they  get  along  to  be
three  or  four  months  old  and  let  water  be  their  drink.
Burn  all  your  chicken,  turkey  and  fish  bones  or  any  small  bones  like
those  from  a  lamb  chop.  Small  bones  are  dangerous.  Dogs  chew  them  up
rapidly  and  being  tender,  make  slivers  of  them,  and  if  one  of  these  small
slivers  gets  into  a  dog's  throat  the  wrong  way  or  fails  to  pass  through
without  any  detention — it's  generally  a  case  of  "good-bye  dog."  Many  dogs
have  died  from  this  alone.
Avoid  sharp  bones,  especially  fish  and  chicken  bones,  as  you  would
poison,  for  they  frequently  are  more  effective  in  killing  a  dog  than  is
strychnine  or  some  other  deadly  agent;  in  that  poison  can  be  neutralized