this  may  continue  for  weeks.  It  is  due  to  a  relaxed  condition  of  the  parts,
and  when  very  profuse  the  bitch  becomes  much  emaciated  and  weakened.
The  alum  injection  should  be  given  and  from  two  to  five  drops  of  witch
hazel  bark,  administered  three  times  a  day  in  a  little  water.  When  this
does  not  stop  the  discharge,  ergotine,  from  cne-half  to  two  grains,  made
into  a  pill,  may  be  given  twice  a  day.
The  mammary  or  milk  glands  often  require  attention,  more  especially
if  all,  or  nearly  ail,  the  puppies  die.  Then  the  milk,  which  often  accumu-
lates in  quantities,  becomes,  as  it  were,  caseated,  the  glands  are  swollen,
inflamed  and  very  tender  and  abscesses  may  form.  The  same  thing  some-
times occurs  when  the  bitch  has  a  large  litter,  in  one  or  more  glands,  the
puppies  seeming  to  take  a  dislike  to  the  milk  in  these  parts;  or  perhaps  the
parts  are  tender  and  the  bitch  refuses  to  let  the  puppies  suck  there.  Many
bitches  who  have  never  been  in  pup,  or  even  served  by  a  dog,  often  have
a  large  accumulation  of  milk  about  nine  weeks  after  being  in  heat,  and
unless  the  parts  are  carefully  watched  to  see  the  glands  do  not  become
swollen  and  hard,  a  good  deal  of  trouble  may  follow,  and  subsequently
gradular  tumors  form,   necessitating  an   operation.
When  the  glands  become  swollen  and  inflamed,  hot  water  fomentations
should  be  applied  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  after  each  fomentation
the  glands,  especially  the  hard  lumps,  should  be  rubbed  with  warm  cam-
phorated oil,  and  the  milk  drawn  off.  Castor  oil  should  be  given  also
every  three  or  four  days.  When  the  bitch  affected  is  rearing  uppies,  it  is
necessary  to  wash  the  camphorated  oil  off  with  warm  water  and  soap  before
she  is  allowed  to  return  to  the  little  ones.
.  While  some  bitches  have  too  much  milk,  others  have  none  at  all;
the  latter  conditions  may  only  continue  for  a  day  or  two,  but  sometimes
it  i&  permanent,  and  though  the  mother  may  be  anxious  to  nurse  the  pup-
pies, she  is  unable  to  do  so.  In  such  cases  treatment  is  of  little  use;  a
diet  of  oatmeal  gruel  and  boiled  fish  may  be  tried,  and  is  occasionally
successful.  In  other  instances  when  this  has  failed,  I  have  found  a  stim-
ulating diet  of  lean  raw  meat  of  some  use.
Bitches  of  a  nervous  disposition,  especially  those  of  the  smaller  breeds
of  dogs,  are  occasionally  subject  to  convulsions  when  nursing  puppies.
It  is  generally  put  down  to  weeakness,  but  I  do  not  think  this  is  the  cause,
for  I  have  seen  these  attacks  occur  when  the  mother  has  been  in  good
condition  and  when   only  rearing  two  or  three  puppies.
The  complaint  is  called  parturient  eclampsia,  and  though  the  symptoms
are  very  distressing,  it  is  very  seldom  that  death  occurs  as  a  result.  The
only  signs  are  restlessness  and  excitement,  the  bitch  keeps  leaving  her
puppies  and  walks  about  panting.  Presently  she  falls  over  on  her  side,
the  whole  body  being  convulsed,  looking  very  much  like  an  animal  which has  been  poisoned  with  strychnine.  The  legs  are  stretched-  out  and  rigid,
the  tail  is  often  curled  tightly  over  the  back  and  the  head  is  drawn  back.
The  mouth  is  generally  kept  wide  open,  the  dog  panting  violently,  but
there  is  no  loss  of  consciousness.
With  respect  to  treatment,  it  is  seldom  medicine  can  be  given  by  the
mouth  in  these  cases,  but  when  it  is  possible,  a  large  dose  of  bromide  of
potassium — say  one  scruple  for  a  bitch  the  size  of  a  fox  terrier,  in  a  table-
spoonful  of  water,  should  be  given.  Great  care  must  be  used  in  giving
the  liquid,  or  the  patient  will  be  choked.  The  bromide  may  be  repeated
in  an  hour.  When  it  is  impossible  to  give  the  medicine  by  the  mouth,  an
enema,  containing  hydrated  chloral  should  be  used.  The  dose  for  a  dog
the  size  of  a  fox  terrier,  in  an  urgent  case  like  this,  should  be  half  a  dram
dissolved  in  about  four  tablespoonfuls  of  warm  water  and  given  when  tepid.
Smaller  dogs — say  spaniels  and  Yorkshire  terriers — may  have  a  scru-
ple of  chloral  dissolved,  of  course  in  less  water.  When  the  attack  has
passed  off,  to  prevent  a  recurence  it  is  advisable  to  give  a  course  of  bromide
— say  from  three  to  five  grains  for  dogs  the  size  of  toy  spaniels  and  fox
terriers  in  a  little  water  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  feed  on.  a  light
diet,  as  bread  and  milk,  or  the  latter  thickened  with  Genger's  food.
If  the  convulsions  do  return  the  puppies  ought  to  be  weaned  and
means  taken  to  disperse  the  milk.  Trouble  sometimes  occurs  in  doing  this
even  when  the  puppies  have  been  gradually  weaned,  and  such  is  particu-
larly the  case  when  bitches  have  milk  without  having  puppies.  Aperient
medicines  should  always  be  given,  castor  oil  being  the  best.  A  full  dose
should  be  administered  about  every  four  days.  The  glands  should  be  rub-
bed twice  a  day  with  camphorated  spirits,  or  the  balsam  of  Peru  ointment.
What  suits  one  dog  does  not  always  suit  another,  therefore  when  the  milk
does  not  seem  to  be  dispersing  as  quickly  as  it  should,  other  external  rem-
edies may  be  tried,  as  rubbing  the  glands  with  whisky  or  brandy,  or  even
eau-de-cologne,  and  I  have  often  had  good  success  by  dabbing  the  glands
frequently  with   the   following  simple  lotion   applied   cold :
Recipe. — Methylated  spirits  (wood  alcohol)  one  ounce;  cold  water  eight
ounces.
The  milk,  unless  it  is  secreted  in  very  large  quantitiesV-'and  is  caus-
ing pain,  or  is  becoming  hard,  should  not  be  drawn  off,  as  to  do  so  only
stimulates  the  secretion.  Sometimes  these  cases  are  extreme-ly  obstinate
and  will  last  five  or  six  weeks,  or  even  longer.  In  such  Iiista'ricies,  iodide  of
soda  is  useful  in  closes  from  half  to  two  grains,  according  to  the  size  of
the  bitch,  given  in  a  little  water,  and  repeated  twice  daily;  •  The  diet  in
these  cases  should  be  light  and  of  a  stimulating  character,  as  bread  and
milk,   dry  biscuits,  milk  pudding,  etc."
One  never  knows  when  some  untoward  circumstance  will  arise  in
parturition.  Pups  come  the  wrong  way,  are  too  large,,  or  something  or  other
happens  that  nonplusses  even  the  best  of  us  sometimes.
A  bitch  should  be  made  to  come  out  to  empty,  herself,  if  only  for  a
few  moments  on  the  first  day,  or  if  she  whelps  at  night,  then  on  the  next
day,  as  many  bitches  through  strong  maternal  instinct,  love  for  their  pup-
pies, and  through  fear  that  some  harm  may  befall  her  children,  will  often
"hold  in"  and  damage  result  from  no  relief  to  the  kidneys  or  stomach.
The  following  is  copied  from  the  American  Field,  and-is  valuable  on
this  subject:
"Bitches  at  such  times  often  become  a  little  distressed,  when  their
labor  is  at  hand,  and  will  crawl  or  creep  into  any  hole  or  corner  in  order
to  seek  relief,  and  will  sometimes  whelp  in  the  most  unsuitable  places — ■
on  a  cold  floor,  for  instance.  The  bench  should  be  protected  on  all  sides,
so  that  the  puppies  are  not  subject  to  the  danger  of  being  thrown  "over-
board," and  the  bench  should  not  be  too  large,  for  fear  of  the  puppies
getting  pushed  away  from  their  dam  and  getting  cold,  before  they  are
properly  dry.     Dry,  clean  wheat  straw  makes  the  best  bedding.
"The  latter  contingency  is  one  that  frequently  happens.  While  the
earlier  puppies  are  yet  moist  they  are  pushed  away  from  their  dam  in
her   efforts   to   give   birth   to    succeeding   puppies,    cold    strikes   into    their
tender  little  system,  they  gradually  lose  the  vigor  which  Nature  has  given
them  to  aid  them  in  securing  the  dam's  teats,  and  drawing  from  them
their  natural  sustenance,  they  whine,  and  gradually  pine  away  and  die,
to  the  consternation  and  dismay  of  an  anxious  and  expectant  owner.
"Some  breeders,  in  order  to  avert  the  possibility  of  what  we  have
just  described,  take  away  the  puppies  as  they  are  born  into  a  kitchen,
saddle  room  or  other  place,  in  which  there  is  a  fire  to  dry  them,  putting
them  back  when  the  bitch  has  either  finished  whelping,  or  at  intervals  of
rest  from  her  labor.
"A  bitch,  shortly  before  she  is  due  to  whelp  and  afterward,  should  be
kept  upon  sloppy  food  rather,  such  as  porridge  and  milk,  bread  and  milk,
hound  meal  soaked  in  sheep's  head  broth,  etc.  While  whelping  she  should
simply  be  given  some  warm  milk.  The  bitch  should  be  allowed  out  Tor
a  short  run  of  a  few  minutes  on  the  second  day,  the  duration  of  which
may  be  increased  each  day.
"The  secret  of  success  in  rearing  puppies  is  fresh  air,  pure  water,
free  and  unrestrained  exercise,  good  food,  given  often  and  a  little  at  a
time,  access  to  grass,  and  a  dry,  warm  bed  at  night.  The  fewer  puppies
are  kept  in  kennels  the  better,  and  the  more  the  foregoing  table  of  hygiene
can  be  observed  the  better  will  puppies  come  on."
Especially  should  the  puppy  quarters  be  kept  sweet  and  clean,  for
a  dozen  flies  will  take  more  out  of  suckling  puppies  than  a  night's  rest
will  put  back.  Here  is  where  a  cool  cellar  or  other  darkened  building  will
be  found  almost  imperative  when  the  mercury  is  trying  to  do  a  century.
The  brooding  quarters  should  be  kept  cool  and  in  semi-gloom,  and  more
than  ordinary  attention  should  be  paid  to  cleanliness  of  the  bedding  so  as
not  to  attract  flies.  Next  to  worms  there  is  nothing  more  irritating  and
calculated  to  retard  a  puppy's  well  doing  than  flies.
Asthma. — This  is  a  common  disease  and  a  most  distressing  complaint,
its  victims  being  mostly  found  among  house  pets  and  toy  dogs  that  have
been  overfed  with  a  too  rich  diet,  and  lack  of  exercise  as  well.  Almast  every
toy  dog  so  improperly  cared  for  and  fed  will  develop  asthma  as  they  get
along  in  years.  The  grossness  of  body  induces  and  fosters  it  and  often
causes  as  well  a  kind  of  scurvy  mange,  the  coat  feeling  harsh  and  dry  with
a  rough  and  dirty  look.  The  symptoms  are  distressing  paroxysms  of  cough-
ing with  great  difficulty  in  breathing,  which  occur  frequently.  The  symp-
toms exhibited  are  due  to 'thickening  of  the  mucus  lining  of  the  trachea  and
bronchial  tubes  which  by  lessening  the  calibre  of  the  respiratory  tract  in-
terferes with  the  act  of  breathing  which  is  attended  by  a  loud,  wheezing
noise.  The  blood  is  imperfectly  aereated  and  the  visible  mucous  mem-
branes congested  and  dark  in  color.  Pugs  and  aged  Spaniels  seem  pre-
disposed to  asthmatic  troubles,  which,  while  not  usually  fatal,  do  not
prove  amenable  to  treatment.
An  important  feature  of  the  treatment  is  attention  to  the  diet,  which
should  be  of  a  non-stimulating  character.  First  relieve  the  animal  by  giving
the  following  antispasmotic  drops:  Compound  spirits  of  sulphuric  ether  and
tincture  of  opium,  equal  parts,  which  keep  in  a  cool  place  and  well  corked.
The  dose  for  a  15-lb.  to  30-lb.  dog  would  be  a  small  teaspoonful  in  a  couple
of  tablespoonfuls  of  gruel  o'r  milk.  This,  however,  only  relieves  and  does
not  cure.  The  dog  must  now  have  frequent  doses  of  a  brisk  aperient,  and
a  pill  of  the  following  prescription  will  be  found  very  beneficial  given  every
night  for  a  while:
Podophyllin    6    grains
Compound  extract  of  colocynth 30  grains
Powdered  rhubarb    4  8  grains
Extract  of  henbane 36  grains
Mix  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills.
Small  breeds  such  as  Pugs  or  Toy  Poodles  give  half  of  one  of  these
pills.
A  little  warm  broth  after  the  pill  will  assist  its  action.  Feed  rather
oftener  than  you  do  your  well  dogs  but  in  small  quantities.  Make  dog  take
more  exercise  every  day,  which  will  cause  him  to  more  readily  eat  coarser
food.  The  chance  of  a  complete  cure  is  not  encouraging  in  a  confirmed  or
chronic  case,  but  the  regular  use  of  the  following  pills  will  have  a  won-
derful effect  in  counteracting  severe  paroxysms:
Powdered   ipecacuanha    6   grains
Powdered   opium    6   grains
Compound  squill  pill 24   grains
Powdered  gum  ammoniacum    24  grains
Powdered   licorice    24   grains
Powdered  rhubarb 12   grains
Mix  and  make  into  twenty-four  pills.
The  dose  for  a  15-lb.  to  40-lb.  dog,  one  pill  morning  and  night.  Small-
er than  15-lbs.  half  a  pill.
Whenever,  severe  fits  of  coughing  with  difficulty  of  breathing  occur,
if  the  antispasmodic  drops  mentioned  in  first  article  are  not  handy,  chloro-
dine  may  be  given  in  the  same  way  as  the  drops,  the  dose  being  from
twenty  to  thirty  drops.  Much  relief  can  be  given  to  asthmatical  dogs  by
confining  them  in  a  close  box  or  kennel  and  filling  it  with  the  smoke  of
thorn  apple.  This  may  be  done  twice  a  day,  but  care  should  be  taken
with  such  patients  that  they  are  not  exposed  to  any  sudden  change  of  tem-
perature, whether  from  heat  or  cold,  or  the  reverse.
Or,  in  place  of  this  during  acute  attacks  when  the  breathing  is  very
labored,  relief  may  be  obtained  by  inhalations  of  the  fumes  of  burning
tar,  resin  or  creosote.
An  asthmatic  form  of  breathing  is  frequently  found  in  connection  with
tumors  involving  the  respiratory  tract.  Such  cases  are  incurable  and  it  is
the  most  merciful  procedure  to  put  the  animal  to  a  painless  death.
Harry  W.  Lacy  has  the  following  to  say  as  to  asthma,  and  I  append  it
also  for  the  benfit  it  may  do:
"Asthma  is  a  very  common  ailment  among  sporting  dogs,  and  is
brought  on  by  repeated  exposure,  followed  by"  inattention.  If  the  simple
duty  of  making  a  dog  comfortable  be  attended  to  at  the  close  of  each  day's
work,  there  need  be  little  fear  of  anything  like  this  ensuing.  It  is  not
actually  the  exposure  to  the  weather  that  causes  a  dog  to  have  lung  trou-
ble, because  when  a  dog  is  out  exposed  he  is  constantly  on  the  move,  and
the  circulation  keeps  up,  so  that  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  contract  a
chill;  but  the  chill  is  contracted  when  the  animal  returns  home  and  lies
down  in  a  wet  condition.  Then  the  blood  ceases  to  circulate  as  rapidly
as  during  exercise,  and  the  animal  becomes  shivery  and  a  cold  develops.
This  repeated  a  few  times  more  or  less  will  end  in  a  cough,  and  asthma
will  ensue.
When  once  a  dog  has  suffered  from  an  attack  of  asthma  there  always
remains  with  him  a  predisposition  to  a  renewal  of  the  trouble.  It  is  a  most
distressing  complaint,  and  in  the  case  of  an  animal  like  the  dog,  which  leads,
or  should  lead  an  active  outdoor  life,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  effect  a
permanent  cure.  Asthma  differs  from  bronchitis  in  several  ways.  It  comes
on  in  paroxysms,  which  gradually  get  worse  and  worse,  until  finally  the
animal  is  suffocated.  The  treatment  usually  adopted  consists  in  placing  the
animal  in  a  room  or  chamber  where  a  kettle  is  constantly  boiling,  so  that
the  atmosphere  is  kept  continually  moist — as  moist  warmth  does  as  much
good  as  anything  to  give  relief  in  such  cases.  As  regards  medicine,  some
of  the  ordinary  cough  remedies  may  be  tried,  the  best  thing  perhaps  being
mixtifre  of  oxymel  or  squill  and  glycerine,  in  equal  parts,  to  which  a  large
paregoric  elixir  is  added.  The  dog  should  have  this  about  three  times  a
day."
Another  very  good  thing  to  do  in  connection  with  any  treatment  you  use
is,  cut  up  an  onion  small  and  fine,  anoint  with  a  drop  or  two  (no  more  or
it  will  blister)    of  kerosene  is  excellent  for  asthma  and  bronchitis.
This,  then  put  into  a  cotton  cloth  and  tied  around  the  dog's  neck  will
afford  relief  in  breathing.     The  onion  should  be  renewed  by  a  fresh  one.
House  dogs  suffer  greatly  from  over-indulgence,  errors  in  diet  and  lack
of  exercise,  which  causes  them  to  put  on  flesh  rapidly.  These  conditions
produce  derangements  of  the  heart,  lungs  and  circulatory  system  that  fre-
quently result  in  a  morbid  condition  of  the  system,  known  as  asthma.  In-
flammation of  the  mucous  membrane  lining  of  the  bronchial  tubes  also
produces  this  disease,  so  that  colds  and  inhalations  of  noxious  gases  and
vapors  are  common  causes.
The  disease  is  easily  recognized  and  there  is  no  danger  of  confounding
it  with  other  affections  of  the  chest.  It  is  not  liable  to  prove  fatal,  but
seriously  affects  a  dog's  usefulness  and  will  unquestionably  shorten  the
animal's  life.
Symptoms:  The  patient  shows  great  distress  and  difficulty  in  breathing,
particularly  after  slight  exertion,  and  suffers  more  or  less  from  suffocation.
Respirations  are  not  increased  in  number,  but  are  labored  and  jerky  and
have  a  wheezy,  croupy  sound  during  expiration.  There  is  generally  a
peculiar  cough.  The  nostrils  are  dilated  and  the  expression  is  anxious  and
pitiful.      The   coat   of   over-fed   dogs   suffering   from   asthma   is   rough    and
dirty  and  dry  and  harsh  to  the  touch.     The  skin   is  often  covered  with  a
mangy-looking   scurf.
Treatment:  A  radical  cure  of  this  disease  is  seldom  effected,  but  much
can  be  done  to  improve  the  animal's  condition.  During  an  acute  attack
of  the  disease  prompt  relief  will  be  afforded  by  giving  an  emetic  of  ten
to  twenty  grains  of  sulphate  of  zinc,  or  thirty  grains  of  ipecac.  The
bowels  should  be  kept  open  with  cascara  sagrada  or  olive  oil.
Much  relief  can  be  afforded  to  dogs  suffering  from  the  spasmodic
form  of  the  disease  by  confining  them  in  a  small  rocm  and  burning  on  a
pan  of  coals  one  ounce  of  stramonium  leaves  and  a  drachm  of  nitrate  of
potassa.
The  following  prescription  can  then  be  used  with  good  results:  Potassa,
iodidi  two  drams,  spirits  ammonia  arom.  one  ounce,  tincture  quassiae  and
aquae,  of  each,  two  ounces.     Dose,  one  teaspoonful  three  times  a  day.
Give  the  patient  slow  walking  exercise,  restrict  the  diet,  prevent  the
accumulation  of  flesh  as  much  as  possible  and  aim  to  secure  the  best  physi-
cal  condition   possible.
Apoplexy — See    Fits.
Abscess. — Pus  or  matter  forming  in  or  among  the  tissues  is  abscess.
It  may  be  due  to  a  blow,  an  accident,  or  caused  by  locil  or  general  in-
flammation. A  bitch  may,  after  whelping,  have  one  of  the  teats  dammed
up,  which  gives  rise  to  lacol  inflammation,  which  would  end  in  abscess.
There  is  unusual  heat  of  the  parts  while  the  abscess  is  forming;  a  hard
lump  at  first,  but  as  the  matter  forms  this  becomes  softer,  and  is  movable
under  pressure  of  the  hand.  Should  it  form  very  slowly,  hasten  its  forma-
tion by  hot  fomentations,  which  must  be  used  continually  for  some  time,
and  afterwards  cover  the  parts  to  prevent  reaction  from  cold  air.  If  you
can  keep  a  poultice  on  the  part  this  is  very  useful.  Get  from  your  druggist
a  piece  of  spongia  piline,  satuate  it  with  warm  water  and  apply  with  the
waterproof  side  out.  When  the  under  part  of  the  abscess  is  soft  and  moves
readily  under  pressure,  it  is  ready  for  opening.  To  open  it  take  the  lancet
between  finger  and  thumb  and  plunge  it  well  into  the  center,  making  a
clean  downward  cut  to  insure  good  drainage;  press  out  the  matter,  bathe
with  warm  water  and  keep  it  clean,  which,  in  most  cases,  will  be  kept  so
by  the  dog's  tongue  if  on  part  of  body  where  he  can  reach  it.  If  not,  then
apply  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen  three  or  four  times  a  day.
In  cases  where  the  abscess  is  deep-seated,  the  veterinary  surgeon  alone
should  use  the  knife.  A  light  and  nutritious  diet  should  be  given,  and  in
many  cases  no  medicine  is  required,,  but  a  mild  purge  can  be  given  when
it  is  forming.  Should  dog  be  much  reduced  and  his  appetite  impaired  after
an  abscess  a  short  treatment-of  Sergeant's  or  Clayton's  Condition  Pills  will
do  al  ot  of  good.  Abscesses  forming  :"n  lung  disease  would  discharge  the
matter  through  the  nose,  also  be  coughed  up,  while  in  the  uterus  it  would
be  by  the  vagina.  Other  internal  organs  may  be  the  seat  of  abscesses,  but
none  of  these  cases  can  be  treated  by  the  amateur,  but  should  be  intrusted
to  the  veterinary  surgeon.
PERI-RECTAL  ABSCESS.
In  a  large  number  of  cases — in  fact  nearly  every  one — of  distemper,
rectal  abscesses  will  be  found.  To  those  who  do  not  clearly  understand  the
best  method  of  handling  them,  we  make  the"  following  suggestions:
Take  the  dog  carefully  between  the  knees  and  bend  the  tail  sharply
upward.  This  will  cause  the  rectum  to  project.  With  the  thumb  and  finger
press  firmly  upon  the  projection,  as  if  to  extract  the  milk  from  a  cow's
teat.  Use  considefable  force.  If  there  is  an  abscess,  this  will  break  it  and
press  out  the  pus.  Be  careful  that  the  pus  does  not  fly  into  the  eyes.
Repeat  this  operation  every  day  so  long  as  there  is  pus.  You  will  find
this  is  a  material  aid  in  effecting  a  cure.
Abortion. — Strictly  speaking,  abortion  means  the  expulsion  of  the
foetus  before  it  is  sufficiently  matured  for  independent  life,  but  applied  to