and  their  owners,  are  Aconite,  Belladonna,  Digitalis  ('Fox-glove'),  Opium
Strychnine  and  their  various  compounds  or  derivatives.  First,  then,
Aconite,  which  is  often  given  as  a  medicine,  and  of  which  it  is  easy
to  give  an  overdose.  Give  an  emetic,  and  then  proceed  with  stimulants — -
brandy,  etc.  Keep  warm,  and  try  artificial  respiration  if  need  be.  For  Bel-
ladonna similar  treatment.  Good  hot  drinks  of  stimulants.  Foxglove
(Digitalis)- — often  prescribed  for  heart  affections  in  dogs,  as  well  as  in  men
- — for  this,  after  an  emetic,  give  warm  tea,  followed  by  stimulants.  Opium,
the  active  principle  of  which  is  morphia,  needs  a  good  emetic,  followed  by
a  draught  of  brandy  and  water;  every  effort  must  be  made  to  subdue  drow-
siness by  brisk  exercise  until  the  effect  has  worn  off.  Lastly,  Strychnine — -
deadliest  of  poisons — a  component  of  all  vermin  killers — easily  recognized
by  its  effect  on  the  muscles.  Give  an  emetic,  followed  by  doses  of  Potas-
sium Bromide  every  twenty  minutes,  and  later  a  dose  of  Castor  Oil.  Strych-
nine is,  as  we  have  stated  earlier,  the  most  active  principle  of  Nux  Vomica."
Here  is  also,  some  good  advice  on  strychnine  poisoning  that  I  found
some  place,  and  worth  including:
"Strychnine  poisoning,  unfortunately,  is  so  rapidly  fatal  that  the  dog
is  usually  found  dead  or  dying.  If  there  has  been  immediate  vomiting  or
only  a  small  dose  swallowed,  the  chances  of  recovery  are  good  when  the
proper  means  are  available.  If  vomiting  has  not  occurred,  produce  it  by
giving  a  warm  solution  of  common  salt  (a  tablespoonful  to  the  pint)  in  large
doses  until  the  stomach  is  well  emptied.  After  this  the  most  important
object  is  to  produce  stupor,  and  morphine,  hypodermically  administered,  as
well  as  being  a  good  emetic,  is  a  safe  narcotic  in  the  dog.  In  dogs  over
six  months  old  one-fourth  grain  can  be  given  safely  for  every  ten  pounds  of
live  weight.  This  should  be  followed  by  chloroform  inhalation  adminis-
tered lightly  and  kept  up  until  the  convulsions  become  less  pronounced.
Chloral  hydrate  is  probably  the  best  antidote  in  cases  where  it  cannot  be
given  by  the  mouth  owing  to  spasm  of  the  cheek  muscles.  It  should  be
given  in  from  ten  to  thirty  grain  doses,  dissolved  in  an  ounce  of  warm
water,  injected  gently  in  the  rectum.  The  dose  can  be  repeated  if  con-
sidered necessary  every  hour.  The  animal  suould  be  kept  as  quiet  as  pos-
sible, harsh  sounds,  bright  lights  or  unnecessary  handling  tending  to  increase
the  severity  of  the  convulsions."
Parasites,  External — The  number  and  variety  of  parasites  that  make
one  part  or  another  of  the  dog  their  habitat  is  very  great.  These  are  di-
vided into  external  and  internal;  in  the  former  two  distinct  mites,  produc-
ing two  very  distinct  forms  of  the  mange,  have  already  been  referred  to,
and  the  internal  parasites  are  treated  under  Worms.
There  is  no  dog  owner  of  much  experience  who  is  not  aware  that  great
care  and  cleanliness  are  needed  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  these  un-
welcome visitors,  or  who  has  not  had  to  pay  smartly  for  their  extermina-
tion, if  his  kennels  have  been  neglected.  The  parasites  to  which  I  par-
ticularly wish  to  direct  attention  are  three  in  number — the  louse,  the  flea
and  the  tick — which  now  follow  in  order  named  as   to  treating.
Dog  Louse. — These  resemble  that  of  a  man,  only  larger  in  size,  and  can
not  live  on  a  human  being.  It  causes  great  irritation,  the  dog  scratching
and  worrying  himself  constantly.  They  live  on  all,  or  any  part  of  the
body,  but  most  abundant  about  the  head  and  face,  the  eyes,  roots  of  ears,
and  along  the  top  of  the  back.  By  closely  examining  the  dog's  skin,  red
streaks  and  dots  of  blood  will  be  seen  where  the  louse  has  been  feeding.
One  species  is  described  in  Prof.  Neumann's  "Parasites,"  translated
by  Prof.  Fleming:
"The  head  is  short  and  almost  as  wide  as  long;  it  is  salient  in  the
thorax  to  which  it  is  exactly  applied;  the  third  and  fourth  articles  of  the
antennae  are  alike.  The  abdomen  is  very  developed  in  the  female,  and  is
a  long  oval  in  shape;  it  has  nine  rounded  segments,  which  are  often  salient
at  the  sides;  stigmates  distinct  and  marginal;  the  first  seven  segments
have  two  rows  of  short  bristles.  The  general  tint  is  yellowish-white,  the
head  and  thorax  being  a  little  darker.  T^he  female  is  2mm.  long,  and  the
male  l-15mm."  This  louse  is  oftener  found  about  the  throat  and  back  of
the  ears,  but  extends  to  all  parts  of  the  body.
The  other  louse  of  the  dog  is  Trichodectes  latus,  of  which  this  is
Neumann's  description:  "The  head  is  sub-quadrangular  and  much  wider
than  it  is  long,  being  truncated  in  front;  the  antennas  are  hairy  and  dif-
ferent in  the  two  sexes,  the  first  article  in  the  male  being  much  thicker,
and  occupying  a  moiety  of  the  length  of  the  organ.  The  abdomen  is  broad,
and  more  rounded  in  the  female,  with  lateral,  but  no  median  spots.     The
122  1)ISEASES
color  is  bright  yellow,  spots  darker;  the  bands  on  the  head  are  blackish-
brown.     Length  of  the  female  is  l-5mm.,  of  the  male  14mm."
My  dog  soap  will  destroy  lice  if  thoroughly  and  well  rubbed  in,  allowed
to  remain  on  dog  for  half  an  hour,  when  you  can  rinse  off  and  dry  the
dog.  If  in  winter,  ^cold  or  damp  weather,  you  must  of  course  be  careful
and  not  expose  dog  to  danger  of  catching  cold.  It  is  the  only  preparation
in  the  way  of  a  dog  soap  that  will  kill  lice,  containing  one  ingredient  which
is  a  secret,  that  enables  it  to  do  such  good  work  in  exterminating  the  pests
that  dogs  are  liable  to  have,  and  yet  perfectly  harmless  to  the  dog,  even
if  he  should  lick  it,  being  non-poisonous  as  well  as  being  excellent  for
the  coat  and  a  great  hair  grower.  I  may  here  add  that  it  is  just  as  good
in  every  way  for  use  on  the  owner's  head  as  it  is  for  his  dog.  In  using
my  soap  to  rid  a  dog  of  lice,  give  dog  a  most  thorough  shampooing  with
your  hands,  not  missing  a  spot  on  his  body  from  tip  of  nose  to  end  of
tail.  Rub  as  close  up  to  and  around  the  eye  as  you  can  without  getting
it  into  the  eye,  but  no  particular  harm  could  come  if  the  lather  get  in  the
eye.  Repeat  this  application  the  same  way  twenty-four  hours  later,  this
to  kill  the  youngsters  that  breed  every  twenty-four  hours.
After  the  application  has  been  on  dog  for  an  hour,  you  can  then
rinse  in  lukewarm  water  and  dry  thoroughly  with  a  rough  towel.  The
same  care  as  to  dog  being  exposed  to  cold  air  or  draughts  must  be  exer-
cised as  in  an  ordinary  bath.  My  soap  can  well  be  termed  a  wonderful
discovery,  and  it  is  without  doubt  by  far  the  best  dog  soap  ever  made.
Here  is  another  treatment  to  givo:
"Lice,  the  presence  of  which  gives  rise  to  the  affection  sometimes
termed  phthiriasis,  are  of  common  distribution,  as  parasites  throughout
the  animal  kingdom.  Two  varieties  affect  the  dog,  namely,  the  Hcemato-
pinus  Piliferus,  and  the  Trichodectes  Latus.'  The  first  of  these,  as  a  rule,
Is  chiefly  found  about  the  head,  ears,  etc.,  but  may  wander  over  any  part
of  the  body;  the  second  is  found  over  various  other  parts  of  the  body,
and  appears  to  play  an  important  part  in  the  life  history  of  the  tapeworm,
the  eggs  of  which  it  may  eat,  and  so  act  as  an  'intermediary  bearer'  of
the  internal  parasite,  which  finds  its  way  into  the  alimentary  canal  through
the  accidental  swallowing  by  the  dog,  of  the  external  parasite.
"Both  species  of  parasite  are  destitute  of  wings,  yellowish  grey  or
yellow  in  color,  and  have  their  mouths  specially  adapted  for  sucking.
Pediculi  always  cause  more  or  less  itching,  consequently  a  tendency  to
■cratch.  This  is  not  all,  but  in  many  cases  they  lead  to  the  formation  of
scabs.
"The  female  is  larger  than  the  male,  and  deposits  her  eggs,  or  nits,
upon  the  hairs,  attaching  each  one  thereto  by  a  tough  transparent  sheath.
The  female  lays  about  50  eggs,  wEtich  are  hatched  in  two  days.
Treatment. — It  is  not  usually  a  very  difficult  matter  to  get  rid  of  lice.
Thorough  cleanliness  is  essential,  with  disinfection  and  destruction  of  all
material  with  which  the  animal  has  been  in  contact.  Sucking  pups  are
frequently  affected,  in  which  case  the  treatment  must  be  directed  to  both
parent  and  offspring.  After  cleansing  of  the  kennel,  destruction  of  the
bedding  material,  etc.,  the  former  should  be  washed  with  soft  soap  and
warm  wat«r,  afterwards  dressed  with  the  following  solution:  Stavesacre
seads  1  ounce,  water  1  quart.     The  seed  must  be  boiled  for  about  an  hour
in  Water,  and  then  adding  sufficienl  water  to  bring  if  up  to  a  quart  again.
With  this  the  dog  should  be  thoroughly  dressed  from  head  to  tail,  taking
care  not  to  leave  one  hair  untouched.  It  is  certain  death  to  both  parasite
and  eggs.  After  24  hours  it  may  be  washed  off,  and,  if  necessary,  applied
again.  The  suckling  pups  must  be  combed  before  being  given  back  to  their
mother.  This  must  be  repeated  daily,  until  they  are  perfectly  free  from
vermin.  They  may  also  be  dressed  with  the  same  solution,  but  it  should
be  diluted,  five  ounces  of  camphor  being  added  to  five  ounces  of  camphor
water.  Of  course  washing  is  here  inadmissable.  Another  remedy,  which
is  equally  effectual,  is  a  weak  solution  of  lime  and  sulphur  lotion,  whilst
for  animals  of  a  more  mature  age,  it  may  be  used  of  the  ordinary  strength."
The  following  will  also  destroy  lice:
Flour    of   sulphur    1   pound
Unslacked   lime    y2    pound
Water    1  gallon
Slake  the  lime  in  the  water,  stir  in  the  sulphur,  adding  water  gradually
until  it  is  of  a  creamy  consistence,  then  add  the  remainder  of  the  gallon
and  boil  down  to  half  a  gallon;  let  it  stand  till  cool,  pour  off  the  clear
liquid,  and  make  the  quantity  to  two  and  a  half  quarts  with  cold  water.
If  the  coat  and  skin  is  thoroughly  saturated  with  this,  and  left  on  for  ten
minutes,  the  vermin  will  all  be  dead,  when  the  dog  should  then  be  well
washed,  using  warm  water,  and  thoroughly  combed  and  dried.  This  may
be  too  strong  a  solution  for  delicate  toy  dogs  with  tender  skins,  and  can
be  reduced  in  strength  by  adding  equal  parts  of  water  to  one  of  the  lotion.
If  any  doubt  exists  as  to  this,  first  try  the  weaker  solution.
Another  and  a  harmless  and  non-poisonous  remedy  for  lice  is  Eber-
hart's  Skin  Cure,  which  will  do  the  work  if  wrell  rubbed  in,  never  missing
a  spot  on  the  dog,  allowed  to  remain  in  for  half  an  hour,  and  applied  again
twenty-four  hours  later.
These  dressings  should  be  repeated  in  eight  days,  in  order  to  destroy
the  young  lice  from  the  "nits"  or  eggs,  laid  before  the  previous  dressing.
Here,  I  give  also,  a  very  good  article  on  Lice,  which  I  found  some-
where, and  it  is  worth  including:
"Lice  cause  great  irritation  and  will  eventually,  if  means  are  not  taken
to  rid  the  dog  of  the  living  burden,  take  the  blood  out  of  the  dog  and  even-
tually cause  death.  Of  course  that  is  extreme,  but  a  bunch  of  such  para-
sites if  not  heroically  handled  will  soon  get  ahead  of  the  operator  and
then  there  is  nothing  to  do  but  shave  the  animal  and  give  it  a  strong
soaking  in  some  mixture  that  will  kill  the  'nits.'  Mercurial  ointment  is
a  sure  knocker,  but  it  is  not  advisable  for  the  novice  to  use  unless  in-
structed in  its  application  and  the  precaution  to  be  taken  that  the  dog
does  not  lick  the  ointment  afterwards  and  thus  become  more  or  less
poisoned.  This  is  obviated  by  muzzling  until  the  ointment  wears  off,  or
is  washed  off.
The  best  thing  we  have  found  is  an  emulsion  made  of  one-third  very
hot  milk  mixed  with  two-thirds  kerosene  oil.  We  generally  mix  it  in  a
kandy  bottle  with  a  shake  stopper  and  opening  the  coat  drop  in  the  emul-
sion  which  of  course  must  be  well  shaken  while  being  applied.  The  milk
counteracts  any  blistering  of  the  skin  that  might  arise  from  the  application
of  the  oil  alone.  This  kills  everything  living  and  saturates  the  eggs  which
are  the  source  of  course  of  future  trouble,  and  the  reason  some  people
find  it  impossible  to  get  rid  of  lice  while  the  dog  lives.  This  treatment
is  not  only  death  to  lice,  but  life  to  the  coat,  bringing  it  out  in  glossy
profusion.  The  milk  must  be  very  hot,  but  not  boiling  or  it  will  curdle
in  the  oil.  When  the  emulsion  has  dried  in,  it  is  well  to  wash  the  dog,
though  this  is  not  absolutely  necessary  unless  the  odor  of  kerosene  is
offensive.
However  many  cures  one  may  make  the  best  one  is  prevention  and
the  measures  to  be  adopted  will  occur  to  any  intelligent  dog  owner.  At  the
same  time  if  it  is  a  case  of  the  home  dog  as  above,  it  is  very  difficult  to
handle  and  unless  periodic  treatment  is  given  the  dog  the  trouble  will  get
ahead  before  you  are  aware.  In  the  kennels  one  may  adopt  heroic
measures  in  the  way  of  burning  partitions  and  the  like  nests,  but  in  a
kitchen,  however  clean,  it  may  be  kept,  there  are  little  nooks  and  cracks
that  cannot  be  so  strenuously  treated,  for  the  dog  may  lie  around  in  many
places.  Applications  of  strong  disinfectants  like  'Standard  Disinfectant'  is
very  good  for  this  purpose." — See  their  ad.  in  this  book.
Naturally  dogs  that  are  kept  in  clean  auar*Qrs  and  groomed  every
day  do  not  have  lice  unless,  as  we  hinted  above,  they  touch  some  dog  that
has  lice  or  come  in  contact  with  some  place  where  lice  dogs  frequent.  This
may  seem  superfluous  advice  to  the  wise  owner  of  dogs,  but  it  is  just  this
ignorance  on  the  part  of  novice  owners  of  dogs  that  breeds  lice  and  kin-
dred parasites,  that  start  skin  troubles  and  all  sorts  of  derangements  sauced
by  continual  scratching  and  the  nervous  condition  in  which  a  dog  infested
with  lice  soon  finds  itself.  The  emulsion  spoken  of  above  may  be  used
with  safety  on  any  dog.  Should  a  pet  dog  start  any  such  trouble,  rubbing
with  alcohol  will  usually  put  a  quietus  on  the  vermin.
The  writer  has  just  tried,  for  the  first  time,  "Standard  Disinfectant,"
on  an  Irish  setter  that  came  back  from  a  show  with  lice  he  got  there,  and
in  two  thorough  applications,  using  a  stiff  brush  to  apply  it,  I  cleared
this  dog  of  the  lice.  I  put  three  ounces  "Standard  Disinfectant"  in  a  pail,
then  added  a  gallon  of  water  to  it,  and  then  used  a  sponge  for  his  head — ■
then  use  a  stiff  brush  for  rest  of  his  body,  legs  and  tail,  applying  it  liberally.
In  ten  minutes  after  I  thoroughly  dried  him  with  rough  towels.  Only  two
applications  were  necessary  in  his  case,  as  I  did  not  miss  a  spot  on  him,
but  sometimes  it  might  be  necessary  for  more  applications,  if  you  had
missed  a  few  lice.
A  special  article  from  Field  and  Fancy:
Pleurisy — Covering  the  lungs  and  reflected  over  the  walls  of  the  chest
is  a  very  fine,  smooth,  delicate,  glistening  membrane  known  as  the  pleura.
This  membrane  is  moistened  by  a  fluid  that,  in  connection  with  the  smooth,
polished  surface  of  the  membrane,  permits  of  the  easy,  frictionless  move-
ments of  the  lungs  during  breathing.  Sometimes  as  a  result  of  wounds,
bruises  or  injuries,  more  commonly  as  the  result  of  colds  and  occasionally
for  no  appreciable  cause,  this  membrane  becomes  inflamed,  and  we  have  a
most  painful  disease  known  as  pleurisy.  In  this  disease  the  lubricating
fluid  previously  mentioned  disappears.  The  glistening  surface  of  the  mem-
brane becomes  swollen  and  roughened,  so  that  in  breathing  the  part  of  the
membrane  covering  the  lungs  and  the  part  reflected  over  the  walls  of  the
chest  rub  together  and  make  breathing  a  most  painful  process.  This  stage
lasts  about  twenty-four  hours,  and  then  the  lubricating  fluid  that  disappears
at  the  first  sign  of  the  disease  begins  to  reappear  in  increased  quantities
and  there  is  a  general  effusion  into  the  chest  cavity  on  the  affected  side.
In  some  cases  this  effusion  is  so  great  as  to  almost  or  completely  fill  the
space  formerly  occupied  by  the  lungs,  and  they  are  compressed  into  a  small
mass  and  rendered  entirely  useless.  In  acute  attacks  of  this  disease  that
terminate  in  recovery  there  is,  in  a  few  days,  a  reabsorption  of  this  fluid,
and  the  pleura  regains  its  normal  condition.  If  the  reabsorption  of  the
fluid  in  the  cavity  is  slow  or  delayed  and  extends  over  a  period  of  two  or
three  weeks  the  patient  is  left  with  what  is  known  as  chronic  pleurisy.
Symptoms:  In  some  cases  there  is  a  soreness  of  the  chest  for  two
or  three  days  to  which  no  attention  has  been  paid;  in  other  cases  there  is
a  severe  chill,  accompanied  by  shivering  and  intense  pain  in  breathing,  so
that  the  animal  does  not  completely  fill  the  lungs,  but  takes  short,  quick,
catchy  breaths.  There  is  a  cough  and  all  the  symptoms  of  fever,  such  as
restlessness,  increased  thirst,  loss  of  appetite,  watery  eyes;  anxious,  wor-
ried expression;  hot,  dry  nose  and  coated  tongue.  The  veins  of  the  eyeball
and  lips  darken  in  color.  The  animal  lies  on  the  affected  side  so  as  to  allow
the  opposite  lung  more  opportunity  to  expand.
An  examination  of  the  chest  will  show  a  restrained  movement  of  the
lungs.  The  characteristic  sounds-  in  the  first  stage,  are  a  dry,  grating,  rasp-
ing sound  caused  by  the  inflamed  and  roughened  surfaces  of  the  pleurae
rubbing  against  each  other.  After  effusion  of  the  liquid  has  taken  place,
we  have  the  second  stage  of  the  disease.  This  is  easily  determined  by  per-
cussion. Press  two  or  three  fingers  of  one  hand  flat  and  firmly  against
the  chest  wall  and  strike  them  with  one  or  two  fingers  of  the  other  hand.
The  blows  should  be  quick,  short  and  light.  Strike  only  once  on  each
spot,  and  move  the  hand  quickly  from  one  spot  to  another  until  the  entire
chest  has  been  covered.  If  this  be  done  to  both  the  well  and  affected  side,
a  rapid  comparison  can  be  made  of  the  difference  in  sound.  If  the  sound
given  forth  is  dead,  flat  and  woodeny,  it  denotes  an  absence  of  air  in  that
part  of  the  chest  and  indicates  that  the  chest  cavity  is  filled  with  fluid
and  the  lung  compressed  into  a  solid  mass.  On  auscultation  the  respiratory
sound  is  entirely  suppressed  or  only  faintly  heard.  An  examination  of  the
chest  of  normal  dogs  both  by  auscultation  and  percussion  will  familiarize
the  owner  with  the  natural  sounds  so  that  he  will  have  no  difficulty  in
recognizing  the  departures  and  variations  in  disease.
The  pulse  in  pleurisy  is  quite  diagnostic  of  the  disease,  being  quick,
hard,  wiry  and  much  faster  than  normal.  The  temperature  varies  from
101  to  103.
Prognosis:  Pleurisy,  although  a  painful  disease,  is  simple  as  com-
pared to  pneumonia  or  bronchitis.  As  a  rule  only  one  side  is  affected,  and
in  the  absence  of  pus,  the  disease  generally  terminates  favorably.
Treatment:  In  diseases  of  the  chest  as  in  all  other  diseases,  diet  and
hygienic  surroundings  are  of  the  utmost  importance.     The  object  in   the
first  state  is  to  relieve  the  pain  and  suffering  and  if  possible,  to  check  the
progress  of  the  disease.  This  is  best  accomplished  by  giving  a  dose  of
Dover's  powder,  varying  in  size  from  five  to  thirty  grains,  depending  upon
the  size  of  the  dog.  This  will  relieve  the  pain,  quiet  the  patient  and  thus
limit  the  constitutional  disturbance.  The  chest  jacket,  described  in  the
treatment  of  pneumonia,  should  then  be  applied,  as  it  is  a  great  protec-
tion.
If  a  dose  or  two  of  Dover's  powder  early  in  the  disease,  does  not  check
its  course,  the  following  prescription  may  be  used:
Morphine   Sulphates    ■ two   grains
Tr.  Aconite  Rad twenty  drops
Aquae three  oz.
Ft.   Mist  Sig.
Dose  is  one  teaspoonful,  every  four  hours,  until  the  animal  is  quiet
and  inclined  to  sleep.
If  the  fluid  within  the  chest  cavity  docs  not  disappear  within  a  week,
there  is  danger  of  its  becoming  purulent.  A  veterinary  surgeon  or  physi-
cian should  be  called  in  to  tap  the  chest,  low  down  and  far  back  and  draw
part  of  the  fluid  with  an  asperating  needle  or  a  trochar  and  canula.
If  the  bowels  do  not  move  freely,  they  can  be  opened  and  kept  so  by
the  syrup  of  buckthorn  in  tablespoc-nful  doses,  repeated  as  often  as  may
be  necessary.  If  the  animal  is  very  weak,  or  the  general  strength  seems
to  be  impaired  by  the  use  of  these  laxatives,  they  should  be  dispensed  with.
Keep  up  the  animal's  strength  by  feeding  raw,  lean  beef,  chopped  fine,
raw  eggs,  milk  punch,  mutton  broths  and  anything  he  will  eat  of  a  nour-
ishing nature.  After  the  fever  abates  and  the  crisis  has  passed,  the  emul-
sion of  cod  liver  oil  in  tablespoon ful  doses  should  be  given  three  or  four
times  a  day.     A  good  tonic  pill  is  prepared  as  follows:  /
Sulphate   of  Quinine    12  grains
Sulphate  of  Iron    12  grains
Extract   of   Gentian    12  grains
Powdered    Ginger     12  grains
Diastase     3  grains
Pepsin     2  4  grains
Make  into  twelve  pills  and  give  one  night  and  morning.