"Where  great  debility  is  noted  it  is  well  to  accompany  the  eggs  with
a  tablespoonful  of  sherry  wine,  or  if  exhaustion  is  very  great  he  may  be
stimulated  by  the  same  quantity  of  brandy.  Unless  the  dog  takes  food
without  forcing,  two  eggs  morning  and  evening,  together  with  a  little
lean  chopped  beef,  milk  or  broth  in  the  middle  of  the  day  should  be  suffi-
cient. By  avoiding  continual  disturbance  of  the  sufferer  he  will  progress
much  better  than  if  subjected  to  undue  attention.
"His  temperature  must  not  be  allowed  to  get  too  high.  To  guard
against  this  and  other  things  throughout  his  ordeal  until  the  appetite  re-
turns, he  should  have  strict  attention  throughout.  It  is  well,  too,  to  have
listerine  in  a  small  jam  pot  with  a  scrap  of  sponge  changed  twice  a  day,
with  which  to  wash  the  mouth,  eyes  and  nose,  and  the  discharge  from  the
latter  can  be  much  lessened,  relieved  and  finally  dried  up  by  the  admin-
istration of  powdered  camphor  in  the  form  of  snuff.
"Also  the  bowels  must  be  watched,  opening  medicine  given  if  at  all
costive,  and  on  recovery  the  patient  must  not  be  allowed  to  go  out  too  soon
or  exert  himself  violently  unless  you  want  a  relapse.  Very  great  benefit
will  be  derived  from  burning  a  cresoline  lamp,  placed  fairly  near  to  the
patient  during  the  whole  illness.  It  acts  as  a  disinfectant,  is  good  for  the
respiratory  organs,  and  generally  tends  to  the  curtailment,  occasionally  even
the  prevention  of  the  malady.
"The  fact  is  that  every  case  of  distemper  needs  to  be  treated  on  its
own  merits,  according  to  the  symptoms  which  it  presents.  When  any  com-
bination of  symptoms  such  as  sickness,  diarrhoea,  or  cough,  or  fits  present
itself,  it  must  be  dealt  with  in  the  order  of  severity — that  is  to  say,  the
most  distressing  symptoms  must  be  taken  first,  and. have  particular  atten-
tion paid  to  it,  while  the  less  serious  symptoms  can  be  dealt  with  as  oppor-
tunity offers.
"There  are,  however,  certain  points  connected  with  the  treatment  of
distemper  which  apply  to  all  cases  alike.  One  of  the  most  important  of
these  points  has  reference  to  diet.  When,  by  the  aid  of  a  veterinary  clinical
thermometer,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  a  dog  supposed  to  be  suffering
from  distemper  is  in  a  feverish  condition,  it  becomes  important  that  no
solid  food  whatever  should  be  given  until  the  fevered  condition  has  been
reduced.     A  dog  must  be  kept  on  liquid  food,  such  as  gravy  and  milk.
"Another  point  of  importance  in  all  cases  of  distemper  is  with  regard
to  exercise.  The  greatest  care  chould  be  taken  not  to  allow  a  dog  to  con-
tract a  chill,  and  it  should  only  be  exercised  if  the  weather  be  perfectly
fine  and  dry,  and  not  even  then  if  there  is  much  feverishness.  Where
valuable  dogs  are  concerned,  the  owners  must  attend  to  all  these  matters,
and  treat  patients  with  as  much  care  as  a  human  patient  requires,  because
the  more  highly  bred  a  dog  is,  as  a  rule,  the  more  delicate  he  will  be,  and
a  greater  difficulty  there  will  be  to  get  him  safely  through  a  severe  attack
of  distemper.
"Many  dogs  when  suffering  from  distemper  have  a  disposition  more
or  less  pronounced  to  roughness  of  the  skin,  and  in  many  cases  absolutely
to  eczema.  The  eczematous  eruption  which  so  often  appears  during  dis-
temper is  liable  to  be  mistaken  for  mange,  because  it  usually  appears  as  an
eruption  of  small  pustules  filled  with  a  watery  fluid,  which  discharges  and
makes  the  animal's  coat  very  unpleasant.  It  may  also  be  said  at  the  out-
set that  the  appearance  of  an  eruption  during  distemper  should  always  be
regarded  with  satisfaction,  inasmuch  as  that  is,  practically  speaking,  na-
ture's way  of  throwing  off  the  ill  humors  with  which  the  body  is  charged.
The  efforts  of  the  owner  of  a  dog  which  is  suffering  in  this  way  should  be
directed  rather  to  modifying  the  severity  of  the  skin  trouble,  and  of  giving
the  dog  comfort  while  that  lasts,  than  checking  it.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing
to  try  to  drive  back,  as  it  were,  an  outbreaking  complaint  into  the  sys-
tem. It  is  far  better  to  let  it  run  its  course,  subject  to  a  local  alleviative
treatment.
"During  the  time  that  a  dog  is  suffering  from  distemper,  it  is  well
to  watch  carefully  for  any  symptoms  of  paralysis,  which  would  be  indicated
by  twitching  of  the  muscles  and  sometimes  by  a  fit.  There  are  a  great  many
Of  these  cases  nowadays — more  than  there  used  to  be  by  far.     Skin  disease
ii  should  be  regarded  as  kind  of  a  safety  valve,  for  dogs  that  suffer  from  skin
complaint  rarely,  if  ever,  develop  paralysis  or  chorea.
The  following  valuable  article  was  taken  from  Field  and  Fancy:
After  -Effects  of  Distemper — Distemper  in  itself  is  not  so  serious  a
matter  as  are  the  troubles  which  follow  in  its  wake.  The  most  deadly  of
these  is  the  complaint  known  as  chorea,  or  paralysis,  sometimes  called
"twitch,"  which  is  an  involuntary  jerking  of  the  nerves,  affecting  sometimes
the  head,  sometimes  the  legs,  sometimes  the  whole  body.  It  usually  comes
about  in  this  way:  A  dog  has  distemper,  and,  as  the  owner  believes,  has
it  very  mildly;  he  merely  shows  signs  of  a  little  cold,  or  perhaps  he  is  merely
"off  color,"  as  the  expression  is,  loses  his  appetite  and  seems  not  to  be
himself  for  a  few  days,  no  other  symptoms  in  particular  making  their  ap-
pearance.
After  a  few  days  he  is  better,  and  the  owner  thinks  he  has  had  dis-
temper and  is  getting  over  it,  and  nothing  more  is  thought  of  the  matter
until  a  little  later  on — probably  after  the  lapse  of  week  or  two — he  has  a
fit,  and  on  recovering  from  the  fit  it  is  found  that  he  is  twitching  all  over.
This  is  not  always  what  happens.  In  many  cases  the  first  symptoms  of  any-
thig  wrong  takes  the  form  of  this  involuntary  twitching  of  the  muscles;
bpt  the  disease  is  very  insidious  and  comes  on  in  various  ways,  although  it
seems  to  be  almost  entirely  connected  with  distemper,  and  the  moral  to
be  learned  from  this,  therefore,  is  that  any  case  of  distemper,  however  mild,
should  be  treated  as  seriously  as  if  it  were  a  bad  attach,  because  this  chorea
or  paralysis  ought  almost  to  be  described  as  a  sort  of  suppressed  distemper,
which,  if  the  case  is  thoroughly  treated,  is  brought  out  of  the  system  instead
of  being  allowed  to  lie  dormant  there  until  it  affects  the  brain  and  causes
the  distressing  symptoms  of  twitching,  which  in  many  cases  last  till  the
end  of  the  dog's  life.
With  regard  to  carelessness  in  dealing  with  dogs  which  are  convales-
cent. The  most  dangerous  cases  of  distemper,  apart  from  those  in  which
there  has  been  chorea  or  paralysis,  are  the  cases  in  which  the  liver  is  very
seriously  affected.  Jaundice,  as  every  one  knowrs  who  has  had  experience
with  it,  is  a  very  bad  complaint,  and  it  carries  off  a  good  many  dogs.  It
very  often  occurs  in  combination  with  distemper,  and  when  a  dog  which  has
been  suffering  in  that  way  with  a  combination  of  distemper  and  liver  com-
plaint has  taken  a  turn  for  the  better  great  care  will  be  needed  for  some
time.
DOG  PAPERS  YOU  NEED
There  are  several  published  devoted  to  dogs.  (I  take  them  all),  and
even  if  you  only  own  one  dog,  it  will  be  of  great  benefit  to  you  to  read  these
dog  journals:
"Field  and  Fancy,"  (weekly),  you  can't  well  do  without.
"American  Fancier,"  edited  by  Harry  W.  Lacy,  comes  out  fifty-two  times
a  year,  and  as  a  fearless  writer  is  not  surpassed  by  any  one.
"Dogdom,"  a  handsomely  gotten  up  monthly  magazine,  profusely  il-
lustrated, is  the  best  dollar  investment  a  dog  owner  can  make.
Then  there  is  "The  Dog  Fancier,"  another  monthly,  published  for  many
years  by  Eugene  Glass,  Battle  Creek,  Mich.,  full  of  dog  news,  and  costs
only  a  dollar.
"The  American  Field,  (weekly),  the  oldest  dog  paper  of  all,  their
specialty  is  hunting  dogs,  and  if  you  are  interested  in  sporting  dogs,  you
can't  afford  to  not  get  this  paper.
A  new  monthly,  "Dog  "World,"  handsomely  gotten  up  and  very  read-
able, costs  only  a  dollar  a  year.
"Hounds  and  Hunting,"  devoted  to  Beagles  and  Hounds,  is  just  the
paper  for  anyone  interested  in  these  breeds,  to  read.
All  these  papers  have  advertisements  in  the  book,  but  if  you  prefer
you  can  remit  the  subscription  price  to  me,  and  I  will  see  that  you  get
the  paper.
DRUGS
Table  for  Mixing  Standard  Oil  of  Tar.
%  Teaspoonful  Standard  Oil  of  Tar  in  Tumbler  of  Water  is  1  part  to 100.
1  Teaspoonful  in  Pint  of  Water  is  1  to  100.
%   Pint  to  6  Gallons  of  Water  is  1  to  100.
1  Pint  to  12  Gallons  of  Water  is  1  to  100.
It  will  be  easy  to  get  other  proportions  by  using  this  as  a  base.
Acetic  Acid.— '-Used  in  making  Mindererous'  spirit,  which  enters  into
fever  mixture,  distemper  mixture,  etc.;  also  as  a  cooling  lotion,  combined
with  sal  ammoniac  and  spirit,  for  application  to  swellings  and  bruises,  to
reduce  local  inflammation  where  the  skin  is  not  broken.
Cooling  Lotion. — The  following  is  the  formula:  Take  sal  ammoniac  4
ounces,  strong  acetic  acid  10  ounces,  boiling  water  10  ounces,  methylated
spirit  2  ounces.  Powder  the  sal  ammoniac  and  dissolve  in  the  boiling  water
and  acetic  acid,  and  add  the  spirit.
Before  applying  the  lotion  it  must  be  mixed  with  eight  or  ten  parts  of
cold  water,  and  the  part  kept  constantly  wetted  with  it  until  heat,  pain  and
other  inflammatory  symptoms  have  disappeared.  N.  B. — An  intermittent
use  of  such  lotions  by  causing  reaction  often  does  more  harm  than  good.
Gallic  Acid — Astringent  and  Stypic. — Given  in  diabetes  and  for  in-
ternal hemorrhage.  Dose,  three  to  eight  grains.  The  following  powders
are  a  useful  form  in  which  to  administer  it.
Styptic  Powders. — Take  gallic  acid  3  grains,  powdered  alum  4  grains,
powdered  opium  %  grain,  to  make  one  powder.  One  to  be  given  twice  or
thrice"  a  day.
Aconite — The  common  name  of  this  plant  is  monk's-hood,  and  both
the  leaves  and  root  are  used  in  medicine.  The  liniment  of  aconite  of  the
British  Pharmacopoeia  often  proves  of  great  value  in  assuaging  the  pangs
of  rheumatism,  and  the  tincture  added  to  the  distemper  mixture  is,  in  cases
where  there  is  nervous  excitement,  of  great  value.  It  must  always  be
given  with  great  caution.  The  dose  of  the  tincture  is  from  one-half  to  three
drops,  according  to  age  and  size.
j        Aio©e.»-Thi8  is  one  of  the  safest  and  best  purgatives  for  the  dog,  the
dose  is  from  ten  grains  up  to  twenty  grains,  the  dog  requiring  a  propor-
tionately much  larger  dose  of  this  drug  than  man;  it  is,  however,  always
advisable  to  try  the  effects  of  the  smaller  dose  first,  as  the  lives  of  many
dogs  are  sacrificed  to  a  rash  boldness  in  administering  overdoses.  Aloes
are  generally  given  in  conjunction  with  other  purgatives,  as  jalap,  rhubarb,
etc.,  and  they  enter  into  the  composition  of  most  aperient  pills  made  for
the  dog.     The  following  is  a  useful  mild  aperient  bolus:
Mild  Aperient  Bolus. — Take  aloes  socotrine,  iy2  drams;  powdered  jalap,
2  scruples;  powdered  ginger,  1  scruple;  Castile  soap,  y%  dram;  make  into
twelve  balls.     Dose,  one  or  two.     Or  for  small  dogs,  into  24  pills.
Alum. — Astringent;  dose  four  to  eight  grains,  given  in  diabetes  and
internal  hemmorrhage  (see  Acid,  gallic).  Alum  is  also  given  in  cases  of
obstinate  diarrhea,  in  conjunction  with  opium,  and  it  may  be  advanta-
geously given  in  such  cases  as  a  clyster,  dissolved  in  gruel.  Burnt  alum  is  a
very  mild  caustic  applied  to  fungus  growths.
Ammonia,  Aromatic  Spirits  of  (Spirit  of  Sal  Volatile). — A  diffusible
stimulant  and  antacid.  It  is  useful  in  colic,  and  is  given  in  cases  of  de-
pression of  the  vital  powers.  The  dose  is  from  ten  drops  to  a  teaspoonful.
It  must  always  be  largely  diluted  before  it  is  given.
Ammonia,  Muriate. — Sal  ammoniac.     For  uses  see  Acetic  acid.
Ammonia,  Solution  gf  Acetate  of  (Mindererus'  Spirit). — Given  in  febrile
and  inflammatory  disorders,  distemper,  pneumonia,  etc.  The  following  mix-
ture for  distemper  which  may  be  given  in  any  case  where  feverishness  or
inflammation  is  present:
Distemper  Mixture. — Take  chlorate  of  potash  2  drams,  sweet  spirit  of
nitre  2  drams,  Mindererus'  spirit  1  ounce,  tincture  of  henbane  2  drams,  wa-
ter sufficient  to  make  4  ounces.  Dose,  from  one-half  to  three  teaspoonfuls
three  or  four  times  a  day.
Ammonia,  Strong  Liquid. — This  is  used  as  a  blister  to  the  dog  (see
Blisters).  Diluted  with  three  parts  of  distilled  water,  it  forms  the  spirit
of  hartshorn  of  the  shops,  which,  with  other  articles,  is  used  as  a  liniment
for  sprains,  bruises,  rheumatism,  etc.
Liniment  for  Sprains. — Equal  parts  of  spirit  of  hartshorn,  turpentine,
rape  oil,  and  laudanum,  make  a  generally  useful  liniment  for  the  above
purposes.     If  in  a  glass-stoppered  bottle  it  will  not  be  impaired  by  keeping.
Antimonial  Powder  (True  James'  Powder). — This  is  given  as  a  febri-
fuge and  diaphoretic  in  doses  of  from  four  to  six  grains;  it  is  preferred  to
tartar  emetic,  as  not  being  so  likely  to  excite  the  dog's  stomach.  It  is  by
some  relied  on  as  a  cure  for  distemper.
Antimony,  Tartarated  (Tartar  Emetic). — This,  as  its  name  implies,  is
an  emetic.  On  the  dog's  stomach  it  acts  very  quickly;  but,  indeed,  vomiting
appears  to  be  quite  a  natural  act  in  the  dog,  and  no  doubt  it  is  attended
with  beneficial  results  when  he  is  his  own  doctor  and  applies  to  his  natural
physic,  the  couch  or  dog  grass;  but  this  habit  in  the  dog  has  been  used  to
his  injury,  and  the  use  of  emetics  shamefully  abused,  and  from  being  treat-
ed as  a  panacea  for  all  dog  ills,  has  done  much  harm.  Emetics  are,  however,
of  use,  and  it  is  not  bad  practice  to  give  one  on  the  first  appearance  of  dis-
temper or  jaundice,  and  in  cases  of  poisoning  they  are  our  sheet  anchor.
The  dose  of  tartar  emetic,  as  an  emetic,  is  from  one  to  three  grains  given
dissolved  in  warm  water,  and  the  dog  freely  drenched  with  it.  It  is  also  used
as  a  febrifuge  in  doses  of  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  half  a  grain;  but  for
this  purpose  the  James's  Powder,  another  preparation  of  antimony,  is  to  be
preferred.
Arnica,  Tincture  of. — This  is  applied  externally  as  a  stimulant  in
sprains,  bruises  and  rheumatic  lameness  ,and  also  for  dispersing  tumors.  It
should  be  used  as  a  lotion  diluted  with  from  ten  to  twenty  parts  of  cold
water.
Arsenic,  Fowler's  Solution  of. — This  is,  I  believe,  the  only  way  in
which  arsenic  is  given  to  the  dog.  It  is  an  alterative,  and,  as  such,  is  of
great  value  in  some  cases  of  mange  and  other  obstinate  skin  diseases.  The
dose  is  from  two  to  eight  drops.  It  should  always  be  given  on  a  full  stom-
ach, and  it  must  be  withheld  for  a  week  or  so  if  it  has  produced  redness  of
the  eyes,  running  of  watery  fluid  from  the  nose,  and  a  loathing  of  food.
I  generally  give  it  with  a  tonic  to  prevent  this  last  result.  Give  each  dose
in  a  teaspoonful  of  tincture  of  gentian  or  Peruvian  bark,  immediately  after
a  meal.
Belladonna Deadly   nightshade.      This   is   a   narcotic   and   sedative   of
very  powerful  action,  and,  like  aconite,  must  be  used  with  great  caution.  The
tincture  is  the  most  useful  preparation  of  it.     Dose,  from  two  to  six  drops.
Bonzoin,  Tincture  of  (Friar's  Balsam). — An  excellent  application  to
cuts,  tears,  bites,  &c.  It  should  be  applied  as  soon  as  the  parts  are  cleaned
from  dirt,  &c,  to  stop  bleeding  and  protect  the  exposed  surface.  The  tinc-
ture is  also  given  in  chronic  coughs.     Dose,  ten  or  fifteen  drops  on  sugar.
Bismuth — The  subnitrate  of  bismuth  has  a  soothing  effect  in. stomach
disorders,  and  in  long-continued  diarrhea  is  often  most  beneficial.  Three
to  ten  grains  of  it  may  in  such  cases  be  given  twice  a  day  in  chalk  mixture.
Bromide  of  Potassium — This  is  very  useful  in  epileptic  fits  and  to  allay
excitement.  It  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  grains,  and
where  a  dog  is  subject  to  fits,  continued  for  two  or  three  weeks.  It  has,
however,   a   debilitating   effect.
Buckthorn  (Syrup  of). — This  is  a  time-honored  purgative  for  the  dog,
and  a  very  good  one,  although  it  has  got  into  disrepute,  as  I  believe,
through  the  rubbish  that  is  too  commonly  sold  under  the  name;  or  since  it
became  obsolete  as  a  medicine  for  man  druggists  have  been  less  careful  in  its
preparation.  The  syrup  should  be  made  from  the  fresh  juice  of  the  berries
of  buckthorn  (Rhamous  catharticus),  a  shrub  or  tree  which  grows  plenti-
fully in  our  woods  and  hedges.  The  average  dose  is  one  tablespoonful,  and
to  prevent  griping  a  teaspoonful  of  syrup  of  white  poppies  should  be  added.
Calomel Acts    as    an     emetic  and    purgative;     it   is   at  all   times  an
uncertain  and  unsafe  medicine  for  the  dog.  Youatt  and  others  say  it  should
never  be  given  in  larger  doses  than  three  grains.  Country  farriers  and
others  often  give  it  in  much  larger  doses — indeed,  by  the  rule  of  thumb — ■
and  the  consequence  is  the  death  or  utter  ruin  of  many  valuable  dogs.  As
a  remedy  in  the  yellows  and  other  affections  of  the  liver,  podophyllin,  or
"vegetable  calomel,"  is  safer  and  more  effective.
Camphor — Calmative  and  antispasmodic.  May  be  given  in  cases
of  excitement  and  restlessness,  and  also  in  severe  diarrhea.  The  dose  is
from  two  to  eight  grains.
Carren  Oil A  most  useful  application  to  scalds  or  burns.     It  is  made
by  mixing  equal  parts  of  raw  linseed  oil  and  lime  water.
Castor  Oil Purgative.     Dose,  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  wineglassful.
It  is  a  mistake  to  give  very  large  doses,  as  such  are  useless,  the  excess  being
carried  off  by  the  bowels.
Cayenne  Pepper — Stimulant  and  stomachic.
Chalk,  prepared — Anticid  in  its  effects;  it  is  particularly  useful  in
diarrhea,  for  which  it  may  be  given  alone  if  nothing  better  can  be  conven-
iently had.     Dose,  as  much  as  will  lie  on  a  quarter.
Chloral  Hydrate — Antispasmodic  and  soporific.  May  be  given  in  cases
of  fits,  also  when  the  dog  suffers  great  pain.  Dose,  from  five  to  twenty
grains,  according  to  size  of  dog,  and  the  result  it  is  desired  to  produce.  The
larger  dose  would  induce  sleep.
Chloroform. — Principally  used  as  an  anoesthetic  in  painful  operations.
It  also  acts  as  an  anodyne  and  antispasmodic  in  colic,  etc.  As  such  it  is
generally  given  in  the  form  of  chloric  ether,  the  dose  of  which  is  from  ten
to  thirty  drops  in  water  or  other  fluid.
Uhinchoiia,  or  Peruvian  Bark. — This  is  a  well  known  medicine,  and,
as  a  tonic,  suits  the  dog  admirably.  It  is  especially  useful  after  distemper
and  other  lowering  diseases,  and  works  wonders  in  getting  dogs  into  high-
class  condition  for  shows  or  work.  The  following  preparation  of  the  bark
is  most  convenient,  being  in  concentrated  form,  and  will  keep  good  for
years:
Concentrated  Bark  Tonic. — Take  concentrated  decoction  of  yellow  cin-
chona bark,  compound  tincture  of  bark,  equal  parts;  dose,  one  to  two  tea-
sponfuls  twice  daily  in  water,  as  a  drench.
Cod  .Liver  Oil. — This  well  known  medicine  is  given  to  the  dog  in
cases  of  debility  and  emaciation  supervening  inflammatory  attacks,  and  to
arrest  the  progress  of  chronic  diseases  of  the  respiratory  organs.  It  is  also
given  in  scrofulous  affections.  Excellent  for  ricketty  and  weakly  dogs;
but  it  is  injurious  to  give  it  to  strong  growing  pups  of  the  larger  breeds,  as
it  makes  fat,  and  the  pups  get  so  heavy  the  legs  often  give  way.  Dose,
from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful.     Large  doses  are  a  mistake.
Copper,  Sulphate  of  (Blue  Stone). — Externally  applied,  it  is  a  mild
caustic;  internally  administered,  astringent  and  tonic;  dose  from  %  to  2
grains,  but  is  apt  to  cause  vomiting.  In  applying  it  to  proud  flesh  in  sores,
choose  a  crystal  with  a  smooth  surface,  which  wet  and  rub  on  the  part,  or
scrape  a  little  into  fine  powder  and  dust  over  the  sore.
Cream  of  Tartar — A  cooling  laxative  and  diuretic.  Dose,  ten  to
twenty  grains,  given  daily.
Dandelion. — Given  in  jaundice,  and  other  liver  affections.  The  extract
is  the  most  convenient  form,  or  the  decoction  made  as  follows  may  be
given:  Fresh  dandelion  roots,  sliced,  6  ounces;  water,  iy2  pints;  boil
slowly  down  to  half  a  pint.     Dose,  half  a  wineglass.
Digitalis — See  Foxglove.
Idpsom  Salts — Purgative.  Dose,  one  to  three  drams.  A  convenient
form  for  giving  this  salts  is  the  ordinary  black  draught  of  the  shops.