get  someone  to  take  bicarbonate  of  soda,  always  to  be  found  in  every  house-
hold, or  if  not,  then  common  baking  powder,  and  make  a  creamy  paste,
which  spread  on  a  clean  piece  of  linen  and  put  that  on  the  wound  and  then,
bind  it.  After  a  while  the  emulsion  will  dry,  but  pour  a  little  water  on
the  binding,  so  as  to  soak  to  the  dressing,  and  that  will  do.  You  will
have  no  feeling  of  anything  wrong  and  there  is  little  question  that  it  is
this   feeling   of   something   wrong   that  causes  this   pseudo-hydrophobia.
Dog  men  cannot  be  too  emphatic  in  telling  people  not  to  be  afraid
of  a  dog  bite,  and  if  the  United  States  would  only  pass  a  law  to  hang,
draw  and  quarter  every  managing  editor  of  a  paper  that  published  a  mad
dog  story,  every  doctor  who  told  a  patient  or  suggested  to  a  patient  the
possibility  of  hydrophobia  and  towed  the  Pasteur  institutes  out  to  the
middle  of  the  Atlantic  and  sunk  them  with  all  hands,  that  would  end
rabies  and  the  hydrophobia  scare."
And  now  read  this:  '
"The  late  Dr.  Michel  Peter,  the  greatest  clinical  expert  of  France,
said:  'Pasteur  does  not  prevent  hydrophobia;  he  gives  it.'  This  opinion
was  indorsed  by  such  scientific  leaders  as  Dr.  T.  M.  Dalon,  F.  R.  C.  S.,  Sir
Benjamin  Ward  Richardson,  Dr.  Charles  Bell-Taylor,  Surgeon-General
Charles  Gordon,  of  England,  and  Professor  VonFrisch,  of  Vienna.  The
celebrated  Dr.  A.  Lutaud,  editor-in-chief  of  the  'Jouranl  de  Medecine  de
Paris,'  said  in  that  journal  on  September  16,  1899,  referring  to  the  savants
at  the  Pasteur  Institute:  'They  have  not  diminished  the  mortality;  they
have  augmented  it,  in  creating  the  'madness  of  laboratories,'  very  often
fatal,   with   which   they   have   inoculated   a   great   number   of  individuals.'  "
THE  LAST  GREAT  CASE  OF  HYDROPHOBIA.
The  man  who  wrote  the  following,  that  I  found  in  a  magazine  called
"Everything,"  and  I  wish  I  knew  the  author's  name,  so  as  to  credit  him
properly,  (and  also  to  shake  his  hand,  has  a  great  brain,  and  full  of  com-
mon sense),  so  here's  the  article,  well  worth  reading:
"For  one  time  in  six  thousand  years  as  far  as  history  records  one
man  suffered  death  from  hydrophobia  caused  by  a  dog  licking  his  hand.
That  is  the  story  sent  out  and  that  is  the  story  that  has  caused  the  world
to  talk  and  inspired  newspapers  to  write  terrible  head  lines  about  what  to
expect  next.  We  do  not  believe  that  any  man  ever  died  from  hydrophobia
caused  by  a  dog  licking  his  hand.  In  truth,  outside  of  those  who  make
their  money  in  that  way  there  is  grave  doubt  as  to  whether  there  is  any
such  thing  as  hydrophobia  outside  the  patient's  mind.  If  a  man  can  be
hypnotized  by  another  man  and  made  to  think  that  he  is  a  dog;  and  bark
and  howl;  or  be  made  to  think  he  is  a  millionaire  or  a  dancing  master,  as
people  have  been  hypnotized,  then  a  man  can  hypnotize  himself,  if  he  has
the  power  of  hypnotism,  and  it  is  not  a  far  cry  to  believe  that  a  man  who
has  been  bitten  or  a  man  who  never  saw  a  dog  can  hypnotize  himself  and
make  believe  that  he  has  rabies,  so-called  and  so  defined;  and  die  in  the
throes  of  agony.
In  a  recent  number  of  Dumb  Animals,  that  sterling  paper  published
by  George  T.  Angel,  a  writer  in  some  other  newspaper  was  copied.  His
name  was  J.  M.  Greene,  and  his  article  was  addressed  to  The  Editor  of  the
Tribune  and  is  worth  reading.  We  do  not  know  anything  about  the  Pasteur
Institute  he  describes,  but  we  do  know  that  hydrophobia  is  essentially  ex-
aggerated.     Mr.    Greene    said:
"Much  has  been  written  lately  in  the  press  regarding  the  great  dan-
ger from  the  prevalence  of  'hydrophobia'  in  New  York  city  and  elsewhere,
and  much  more  of  the  same  terror  will  doubtless  be  written  before  the
season  is  far  advanced.  Will  you  allow  me  a  brief  space  for  a  few  ideas
on  this  subject?
"In  the  first  place,  if  there  be  any  one  point  absolutely  certain  and
established,  it  is  that  the  danger  of  getting  the  above  disease  has  been
greatly  exaggerted,  and  that  the  great  majority  of  alleged  cases,  of  not
only  'hydrophobia'  in  man,  but  also  'rabies'  in  the  dog,  have  been  cases  of
some  other  disease.  It  is  also  easy  to  see  whence  comes  the  influence
causing  this  dread  and  delusion.  The  year  following  the  opening  of  the
first  'Pasteur  Institute'  in  Paris,  in  1885,  the  number  of  'hydrophobia'  pa-
tients treated  in  that  city  leaped  to  three  thousand;  previous  to  that,  Paris
could  boast  of  only  about  thirty  'cases'  a  year!  True  'hydrophobia'  is  a
disease  so  rare  that  it  is  not  considered  worth  mentioning  in  mortality  re-
ports. Well  known  medical  investigators  who  have  been  searching  for
many  years  for  authentic  cases  have  failed  to  find  one.  Such  are  Dr.
Lutaud,  of  Paris;  Dr.  Bell-Taylor,  of  England;  Dr.  Charles  W.  Dulles,  of
Philadelphia;  Dr.  E.  C.  Spitzke,  of  New  York;  Professor  J.  W.  Hearn,
of  Philadelphia;  Dr.  Hiram  Corson  and  Dr.  Thomas  Mayo.  It  is  a  notor-
ious fact  that,  all  over  the  world,  societies  and  institutes  that  have  the
handling  of  thousands  of  vicious  dogs,  frequently  biting  their  keepers,
never  hear  of  the  disease.
"But  spurious  cases,  caused  by  nervous  dread,  are  common.  As  in
the  case  of  Mme.  Chevalier,  of  Paris,  instances  have  occurred  from  'sug-
gestion' alone,  where  the  patient  has  not  been  bitten  at  all!  Such  cases,  it  is
no  injustice  to  say,  are  the  product  of  the  morbid  fear  disseminated  and
fostered  by  'Pasteur  Institutes.'  These  concerns  do  a  great  business
throughout  the  world.  But  on  what  basis?  I  have  before  me  a  record,
carefully  revised  from  year  to  year,  which  shows  that  up  to  January
1st  of  the  present  year  1,857  deaths  from  'hydrophobia'  have  occurred
among  patients  who  have  undergone  the  'Pasteur  treatment'  according
to  directions,  in  many  of  which  cases  the  animals  which  did  the  biting
remained  alive  and  well!  In  this  record  names,  dates,  and  other  particu-
lars are  given.
"The  'Pasteur  method'  depends  for  its  commercial  success  on  the
most  colossal  pretensions  and  distortion  of  facts  and  figures.  Among  its
'patients'  are  numbered  those  bitten  by  'rabid'  dogs  and  those  bitten  by
animals  only  'suspected!'.  Again,  dogs  are  often  'found'  to  have  been
rabid  by  postmortem  examination  and  by  inoculating  other  animals  with
portions  of  their  brain  or  spinal  cord,  both  of  which  methods  are  denounced
as  inconclusive  by  leading  scientists,  such  as  Dr.  Colin,  of  Alfort,  and  Pro-
fessor Fleming,  of  England.  Many  substances,  such  as  common  soap,
when  inoculated  into  animals,  produce  meningitis,  the  symptoms  of  which
are  almost  identical  with  those  of  rabies;  Surgeon-General  Sternberg  has
even  produced  these  symptoms  in  rabbits  with  his  own  saliva!  Moreover,
it  is  well  known  that,  with  no  treatment  whatever,  from  90  to  9  5  per  cent
of  those  bitten  by  actually  'rabid'  dogs  recover.  All  these  facts  tend  to
show  that  the  statistics  of  the  'Pasteur  Institutes'  are  absolutely  farcical,
and  as  a  consequence  they  are  ridiculed  by  every  leading  scientific  author-
ity who  has  carefully  investigated,  and  who  charge  them  with  actually
causing  'hydrophobia'  in  many  patients  by  their  inoculations  with  diseased
animal  matter.  This  pernicious  and  most  dangerous  principle  of  deliber-
ately introducing  into  the  life-current  septic  matter  from  'rabid'  animals,
has  without  doubt  been  the  cause  of  numerous  cases  of  'paralytic  rabies'
or  'laboratory  rabies'  in  patients.  The  late  Dr.  Michel  Peter,  the  greatest
clinical  expert  in  France,  said:  'Pasteur  does  not  prevent  hydrophobia;
he  gives  it.'  This  opinion  was  indorsed  by  such  scientific  leaders  as  Dr.
T.  M.  Dalon,  F.  R.  C.  S.,  Sir  Benjamin  Ward  Richardson,  Dr.  Charles
Bell-Taylor,  Surgeon-General  Charles  Gordon,  of  England,  and  Professor
Von  Frish,  of  Vienna.  The  celebrated  Dr.  A.  Lutaud,  editor-in-chief  of  the
'Journal  de  Medecine  de  Paris,'  said  in  that  journal  on  September  16,
1899,  referring  to  the  savants  at  the  Pasteur  Institute:  "They  have  not
diminished  the  mortality;  they  have  augmented  it,  in  causing  the  'mad-
ness of  laboratories,'  very  often  fatal  with  which  they  have  inoculated  a
great  number  of  individuals.'
"As  the  clanger  of  'hydrophobia'  in  man  has  been  viciously  exag-
gerated, so  has  been  that  of  'rabies'  in  the  dog.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  at
least  99  out  of  every  100  alleged  cases  are  cases  of  ill  treatment,  heat
prostration,  fits,  thirst,  stomach  trouble,  epilepsy,  or  similar  affections.
A  dog  with  true  'rabies'  does  not  froth  at  the  mouth;  neither  does  he  go
out  of  his  way  to  attack,  but  gives  every  indication  of  wishing  to  be  let
alone.  These  facts,  however,  have  no  weight  with  some  people,  whose
arrogance  and  bigotry  regarding  our  relation  to  the  'lower  animals'  pass
comprehension.  One  swears  the  life  of  one  child  is  'worth  all  the  dogs  in
the  world;'  another  would  have  all  the  clogs  in  the  state  muzzled  on  ac-
count of  one  case  of  alleged  'rabies.'  Man  spends  his  life  in  abusing  and
slaughtering  his  fellow-creatures;  but,  for-sooth,  if  some  unfortunate  mem-
ber of  that  species  most  faithful  to  man,  wild  with  ill  treatment,  or  the
disease  above  mentioned,  rushes  he  knows  not  whither,  beset  by  imagin-
ary foes,  then  Man  joyfully  seizes  the  opportunity  to  attack  the  sufferer
with  every  convenient  weapon,  as  in  former  days,  under  like  conditions,
he  treated  his  fellow-man!  And  then,  if  bitten  by  his  victim,  he  resorts
to  an  'institute,'  founded  on  and  perpetuating  the  horrible  sufferings  of
artificially  maddened  creatures  (a  supply  of  which,  in  a  state  of  madness
is  constantly  kept  on  hand,  whether  'used'  or  not),  whose  poisoned  tissues
he  absorbs  into  his  circulation  as  an  antidote.  Is  not  this  a  specacle  for
Gods  and  men?"
There  is  no  doubt  in  this  world  but  what  two-thirds  of  the  Na-
tional Belly-aching  is  the  direct  result  of  imagination.  There  is  no  doubt
but  what  if  a  man  can  hypnotize  another  man,  if  he  has  the  power  he
can  and  does  hypnotize  himself,  and  if  this  be  true,  and  it  is  an  accepted
truth,  then  all  some  nerve-wracked  fellow  has  to  do  who  insists  that  some-
thing is  the  matter  with  him,  is  to  imagine  that  a  clog  bit  him  and  then
keep  following  up  the  idea  and  finally  die  like  a  dog  might  die  with
rabies.      That   is    the    long    and    the    short   of    the   matter    in    this    world
where  Wall-Eyed  Science  is  on  the  make  and  whe«re  men  must  earn  their
bread.
The  man  who  owns  pets  and  loves  his  pets  is  a  bigger  man  and  a
better  man  than  the  narrow  souled  and  incomprehensible  creature  who
is  too  stingy  to  feed  them  or  too  mean  to  want  to  give  them  a  place  after
God  Almighty  formed  and  fashioned  them  and  sent  them  here  for  some
good    purpose.
Hydrophobia  is  a  dream — a  self  hypnotic  state  aided  and  abated  by
those  who  want  to  cash   the  coin.      That's  all.
I  hope  my  readers  have  read  all  of  the  many  pages  devoted  to  hydro-
phobia, (and  these  pages  could  have  been  put  in  this  book-as  advertise-
ments at  $35.00  per  page  just  as  well,)  as  there  was  no  trouble  in  getting
the  ads — but  this  book  was  written  to  do  good  to  dogs — and  their  owners —
much  in  preference  to  the  profits  in  coin — because  it  is — has  been — and
will  be  my  highest  aim  in  life,  to  do  good  to  dogs — the  best,  truest,  and
faithful  friend  we  have — four  legs  instead  of  two.
-
(This  classification  of  drugs  and  explanations  is  given  because  the
terms  are  used  to  avoid  verbosity).
Alteratives. — Medicines  which,  if  given  in  small  and  repeated  doses
gradually  bring  about  a  healthy  state  of  the  system  without  seriously  aug-
menting the  secretions — such  as  arsenic  and  its  preparations,  iodide  of  po-
tassium, etc.
Anesthetics. — Chloroform,  or  ether,  drugs  that  deprive  of  sensation  or
feeling.  t  ..^^
Anodynes. — Morphine   or   cocaine,   drugs   that   assuage  pain.
Antiseptics. — Medicines  that  resist  or  check  putrefaction,  such  as  chlor-
ide of  lime,  carbolic  acid,  soda,  creosote,  etc.
Antispasmodics. — Medicine  that  overcomes  inordinate  muscular  action,
from  their  sedative  effects  allaying  spasms  and  convulsions,  as  chloroform
or  opium.
Aperients. — See  Cathartics.
Astringents. — Drugs   used   internally  that  contract  muscular   fiber  and
check  diarrhea,  hemorrhage  and  diabetes,  used  extensively  to  stop
bleeding  and  diminish  discharge  from  wounds,  such  as  alum,  gallic  acid,  etc.
Blisters. — Agents  used  as  counter  irritants  for  internal  inflammation.
Strong  liquid  ammonia  being  a  good  and  quick  blister  for  a  dog;  it  may  be
applied  on  a  cloth  or  sponge  held  on  the  part  to  be  blistered  for  about  ten
minutes.  Spirits  of  turpentine  is  also  good;  wring  a  piece  of  red  flannel
out  of  hot  water,  sprinkle  with  turpentine,  and  apply  to  the  part.  Pure
olive  oil  should  afterward  be  applied  to  blistered  parts.
Cordials. — Medicines  that  increase  strength,  stimulate  the  stomach
and  animate  the  spirits.  Cordials  are  often  given  to  hunting  dogs  after
a  hard  day's  work  in  the  field.     Here  is  a  good  one  to  use.
Cordiane  Ball. — Take  powdered  cardamon  seeds  1  dram,  oil  of  carra-
ways  10  drops,  oil  of  cloves  5  drops,  powdered  gum  acacia  %  dram,  made
into  a  paste  with  syrup;  dose  for  a  greyhound  or  hunting  dogs  is  one-
fourth  of  this,  given  wrapped  in  an  ounce  of  lean  mutton.
Carminatives. — Medicines  that  expel  wind,  such  as  oil  of  peppermint,
ginger,   etc.
Cathartics,  Purgatives,  Aperients. — Medicines  to  cause  discharges,
cleansing  stomach   and  bowels.      Laxatives  and  mild  aperients.
Caustics. — Agents  that  destroy  or  decompose  parts  to  which  they  are
applied,  used  for  proud  flesh  in  wounds,  to  destroy  warts,  to  sear  the  parts
and  prevent  absorption  of  virus  in  case  of  bites,  etc.,  etc.  Nitrate  of  silver,
carbolic  acid,  nitric  acid  or  the  hot  iron  are  the  most  active.
Demulcents. — Agents  to  soften  effecs  of  irritants,  by  sheathing  the
surface,  such  as  glycerine,  gum  acacia,  and  are  used  as  a  vehicle  in  giving
such  irritating  articles  as  turpentine,  oil  of  male  fern,  and  many  others.
Diaphoretics. — Medicines  to  produce  sweating,  as  sweet  spirits  of  nitre.
Diuxetics, — Remedies  which  increase  discharge  of  urine,  such  as  nitrate
of  potash,  Venice  turpentine,  balsam  copabia,  etc.
Emetics. — Agents  used  to  produce  vomiting.  A  dog's  stomach  is  very
easily  acted  on.  Numerous  medicines  are  used.  Ipecacuanha  wine  is  easy
in  its  effects.  Emetic  tartar  and  common  salt  are  useful  emetics.  .  Dogs
eat   grass   to   produce   vomiting.
Emollients. — Agents  that  soften  or  relax  the  parts  applied  to,  such  as
poultices,  camphorated  oil,  olive  oil  and  fomentations.
Laxatives. — See  Cathartics.
Narcotics. — Medicines  to  produce  sleep  and  relieve  pain.  Morphine  is
used  mostly  for  the  dog.
Purgatives. — See  Cathartics.
Stimulants. — Medicine  and  liquors  used  to  produce  immediate  but  tem-
porary increase  of  strength;  given  in  collapse,  exhaustion,  or  in  excessive
debility,  when  fever  is  not  present.  Sherry  wine  clear,  whisky  with  a  little
water  added,   or   good  port  wine,   are   good.
Stomachics  and  Tonics. — Medicines  to  excite  and  strengthen  the  stom-
ach. Tonics  are  especially  good  in  cases  of  debility  following  fever,  dis-
temper and  lowering  diseases;  mostly  used  for  the  dog  are,  quinine,  iron,
gentian,  rhubarb  ,etc.  There  are  several  condition  pills  now  put  up,  espe-
cially for  dogs.  Sergeants'  Condition  Pills,  Glover's  Tonic  and  Dent's
Condition  Pills  are  all  good.  Dr.  Glover's  is  in  liquid  form.  Either  of
these  will  do  the  work.
Vermifuge. — Medicines  to   destroy   or   expel   worms.
Clysters  or  Enemas. — These  agents  are  mostly  in  the  liquid  form,  and
are  administered  for  various  purposes,  as  the  softening  and  removal  of
hardened  fceces,  the  allaying  of  spasm  or  colic  in  the  bowels,  the  destruction
of  worms,  for  checking  diarrhea,  and  more  rarely  for  nourishing  the  body.
The  forms  for  clysters  will  be  found  in  the  parts  of  the  work  treating  of
these  ailments  in  which  they  are  used.  The  means  of  injecting  the  clyster
is  usually  the  common  bladder  and  pipe  sold  by  druggists  at  2  5  cents
each,  or  what  is  greatly  better,  an  india  rubber  bottle  enema,  which  gives
the  operator  greater  power,  and  is  itself  less  trouble,  being  self-filling.
AT  LAST!  The  crowning  and  final  effort  of  my  life —
for  dogs — is  accomplished,  and  this  third  and  final  edition
of  "EVERYTHING  ABOUT  DOGS"   is   out.
Many  days  and  nights  'till  the  clock  would  strike  up  to  three  in  the
morning,  have  I  sat  at  my  desk  and  written,  handicapped  by  my  eyes,  (one
of  them  having  been  operated  on  and  a  cataract  removed),  and  when  1
started  this  book  I  was  afraid  the  strain  on  them  would  be  more  than  they
could  stand,  but  took  the  chance,  for  I  felt  it  was  my  duty  to  dogs,  because
I  knew  how  much  good  it  would  do  dogs,  to  get  to  the  dog  owners  of  this
country  what  is  in  this  book,  and  my  reward  for  all  this  labor  of  love  is
ever  present  within  me,  and  I  am  now  fully  repaid,  aside  from  the  profit
consideration  part  of  it  in  dollars,  and  this  part  not  so  great  as  it  should
have  been,  due  to  the  inflated  cost  of  paper  and  everything  else  pertaining
to  attempting  to  get  out  a  book  in  war  times,  but  I  never  started  to  do
anything  and  changed  my  mind,  or  failed  to  get  through  with  it.  I've  had
human  friends  "change  their  minds" — and  fail  me — in  time  of  need,  but
never  a  dog — and  this  is  another  "difference"  between  a  man  and  a  dog.
The  word  "man"  used  here,  applies  to  both  sexes  in  humans — as  I  have
found  it,  even  if  the  women  are  now  voting  in  several  states.  I  want  to
say,  before  going  any  further,  that  I  am  not  writing  through  any  spirit  of
egotism  or  self-flattery,  not  "throwing  bouquets  at  myself" — (never  could
stand  for  this  in  anyone),  and  I  hope  you  will  not  misjudge  me  as  to  this,
for  I've  been  truthful  and  honest  all  my  life,  and  will  keep  it  up  this  way.
There  never  was  another  "dog  book"  just  like  this — others  may  be  larger,
more  pretentious,  the  language  used  of  a  higher  grade — and  all  that,  but
this  book  is  what  I  believe,  and  feel,  will  accomplish  its  ami— to  do  good
to  dogs — and  that's  what  I  wrote  it  for.  There  is  so  much  in  the  book
that  is  good  (not  all  my  own  real  knowledge),  but  this  book  means,  and  isr^—
the  best  knowledge  that  could  be  gathered  together,  from  my  experience  of
all  my  life  in  dogs,  and  of  others,  more  wise  than  I.
It  has  all  been  done  for  dogs,  my  love  for  dogs,  my  earnest  and  upper-
most desire  through  all  the  many  years  of  my  life — do  good  to  dogs,  and  1
have  been  hunting  for — saving  up — trying  and  digesting  carefully,  every-
thing herein,  so  as  to  feel  reasonably  sure  it  was  good  for  dogs,  and  the
book  is  put  out  with  a  most  comfortable  feeling  that  it  will  do  a  mighty
lot  of  good  to  dogs.  Humans  may  "bite"  you,  (watch  out  for  that  bite,
for  I  know),  but  never  will  your  dog  bite  you — and  harm  you.  Often
bitten  by  dogs  I  have  been,  but  the  dog  did  not  know  he  was  biting  his
best  friend,  but  the  humans  who  did  "bite"  me — they  knew.
My  father  was  a  minister  for  forty  years,  and  I  used  to  have  the  idea
that  I  would  get  into  Heaven  on  the  "family  ticket,"  but  I  now  believe,
that  should  I  fail  on  this,  that  what  I've  done  for  dogs  will  pass  me  in —
(or  ought  to) — anyhow,  I've  two  chances.  I  made  my  will  not  long  ago,
and  in  it  a  provision  as  to  a  home  for  each  of  the  dogs  in  the  kennel  when
I  am  called  away,  (you  should  do  the  same),  and  when  it's  time  to  go  to  the
mysterious  beyond,  about  the  last  comforting  feeling  will  be,  that  my  loved
dogs  will  be  cared  for  nearly  as  well  as  I  have  done  for  them.
In  a  preface  to  a  former  edition  I  said  to  own  a  thoroughbred  dog,
so  as  not  to  have  to  apologise  to  your  friends  when  they  saw  your  dog,
but  I  want  to  change  this  now — to,  own  a  dog — any  kind  of  a  dog,  even  if
not  pedigreed — just  so  it's  a  dog — so  you  can  make  that  one  dog  happy.  My
heart  aches,  often,  when  I  see  a  poor  homeless  cur  on  the  streets,  hungry
and  thirsty — and  if  it  were  possible,  I  would  take  that  dog  home — but  there
is  a  limit  to  everything.  That  night,  after  in  bed,  I  lay  awake,  thinking  of
that  poor,  homeless  dog  I  met  on  the  street  in  the  city  today.
By  this  time  many  who  read  this  will  have  decided  that  I  am  a
"krank" — so  I  am — as  to  dogs —  and  proud  of  it.  The  "curs"  you  see  on
the  streets,  homeless  and  friendless,  are  to  be  blamed  for,  because  of  the
owners  of  female  dogs,  that  were  not  kept  up,  but  were  allowed  to  run
loose  on  the  street  when  in  season,  (but  should  have  been),  and  here  is