The  dog  will  be  happier  in  his  own  home  where  it  will  receive,  aside
from  the  treatment  of  the  doctor,  the  kind  care  and  attention  it  could  not
get  in   a  strange  place,   among  strangers   and  strange   surroundings.
Hookworms. — The  process  by  which  the  hookworm  reaches  the  intes-
tines is  most  interesting.  The  egg,  or  embryo,  is  deposited  in  fecal  matter
within  the  intestines.  It  hatches,  or  develops,  after  being  exposed  to  air
and  moisture,  usually  within  twelve  to  twenty-four  hours,  if  the  tempera-
ture is  above  seventy  or  eighty  degrees  Fahrenheit.  In  about  eight  days,
under  favorable  conditions,  such  as  being  on  warm,  wet  ground,  it  attains
full  growth  (microscopically)  and  is  ready  to  infest,  which  it  does  by  boring
through  the  skin  or  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  into  the  blood  canals,
and  is  carried  along  with  the  blood  currents  to  the  lungs;  then  it  bores
through  the  walls  of  the  blood  canals  into  the  air  sacs  and  crawls  up
through  the  windpipe  to  the  throat,  and  then  passes  directly  to  the  in-
testines, either  by  crawling  or  being  swallowed  with  food  or  water,  attaches
itself  to  intestinal. membranes  and  begins  a  life  which  lasts  from  six  to
ten  years,  unless  expelled.  It  subsists  entirely  upon  the  blood  which  it
sucks.  After  it  is  attached,  it  grows  to  a  length  of  one-third  to  one-half
inch,  the  female  being  somewhat  larger  than  the  male,  as  shown  in  illus-
tration.    She  is  very  prolific  and  one  dog  which  is  infested  will  pollute  a
vast   area    of   ground    by   reason    of   rains    washing    or   spreading    the    feces
containing  thousands  of  eggs  or  embryos.
The  presence  of  hookworm  is  hard,  almost  impossible  to  detect  with-
out the  use  of  a  microscope,  unless  the  investment  is  quite  heavy,  then
rapid  decline  is  noticed,  such  as  general  weakness  or  paralysis  of  the  legs
or   hindquarters.
Symptoms. — Rough  hair;  sometimes  a  cough;  as  a  rule  the  appetite
continues  fairly  good;  languid;  eyes  become  bloodless  and  listless;  gums
pale,  generally  a  creamy  white.  Excretion  sometimes  natural,  again  loose,
again  of  a  dysentery  nature,  frequently  a  little  drop  of  blood  or  two.  This
may  be  examined  by  the  average  layman  many  times  with  the  naked  eye
and  from  the  fact  that  he  "doesn't  see  any"  the  conclusion  is  arrived  at
that  the  dog  is  free  of  hookworm.  Many  times  a  dog  in  apparently  the
best  of  health  is  infected  with  these  terrible  pests,  his  strong  constitu-
tion overbalancing  the  damage  that  Mr.  Worm  is  doing.  This  won't  last
always  and  sooner  or  later  he  will  pay  the  price.
While  a  microscopical  examination  will  reveal  the  eggs,  it  occasionally
happens  that  the  worm  itself  is  shown  in  feces  under  certain  conditions.
Of  course,  a  microscopic  examination  of  the  feces  for  the  ova  is  the  one,
absolute,   certain   way   of   determining   a   dog   having   them.
This  worm  has  been  discovered  in  dogs,  cats,  foxes,  badgers  and
human  beings,  adults  as  well  as  children.  This  is  mentioned  with  the
view  to  impress  upon  all  interested  the  necessity  of  being  alive  to  the
true  situation,  in  order  to  prevent  the  scattering  of  the  disease  and  to
show  the  chances  of  it  being  scattered.
The  worm  attaches  itself  to  the  walls  of  the  intestine  and  lives  about
seven  years.  Remember,  kennel  owners,  the  worm  does  not  incubate  in
the  intestine,  but  simply  deposits  its  thousands  of  eggs  there,  which  are
passed  out  on  the  ground  in  the  excrement.  I  have  dissected  six-week-
old  puppies  and  found  many  hookworms.  This  was,  no  doubt,  brought
about  by  the  dam  lying  out  on  the  ground,  her  teats  being  attacked  by
the  freshly  hatched  worm,  and  brought  to  the  suckling  puppies.  They  were
treated  in  the  ordinary  way  for  worms,  but  this  will  not  kill  hookworms.
If  hookworm  is  found  in  one  dog  in  the  kennel,  it  is  safe  to  assume
every  dog  in  the  kennel  is  infected,  and  should  be  treated.
The  following  most  valuable  article  is  from  The  American  Field,   writ-
ten by  Edward  Martin,  M.  R.  C.  V.  S.:
"Until  quite  recently  hookworm  disease  in  the  dog,  also  known  as
pernicious  anemia,  uncinariasis,  etc.,  has  been  but  slightly  recognized.  This
is  probably  owing  to  neglect  on  the  part  of  owners  of  dogs  and  veterin-
arians to  make  careful  post-mortem  examinations,  and  again,  to  the  fact
that  young  dogs  infected  with  hookworm  generally  carry  round  worms  and
tapeworms,*  and  it  is  to  the  effects  of  these  that  death,  when  it  occurs,  is
attributed.
The  hookworm  parasite,  technically  known  as  Uncinaria,  inhabits^the
small  intestines  of  dogs  and  foxes.  When  mature  they  attach  themselves
to  the  mucous  membrane  and  live  entirely  on  the  blood  they  extract.  For
the  purposes  of  this  article  they  may  be  described  as  an  extremely  fine
round  worm,  white  or  grayish  in  color,  from  one-third  to  seven-eighths  of
an  inch  in  length,  and  about  as  thick  as  a  fine  sewing  needle.    As  they  can
seldom  be  seen  in  the  stools  it  may  be  advisable  to  describe  their  appear-
ance on  post-mortem  examination  of  their  host.
Dogs  dying  from  this  disease  are  generally  emaciated,  and  when  the
patient  has  lingered  long  covered  with  bedsores.  The  gums  are  pale,  often
spongy  and  ulcerated,  the  teeth  covered  with  a  dark  green  deposit,  with  a
pronounced  odor.  On  opening  the  abdomen  the  mesenteric  glands  are
generally  found  to  be  enlarged  and  dark  in  color,  due  <to  irritation  set  up
by  the  poisonous  products  of  the  parasites.  The  outer  surface  of  the  stom-
ach and  bowels,  as  a  rule,  show  little  or  no  changes;  in  aggravated  cases
there  may  be  a  few  dark  red  or  purple  spots.
To  find  the  parasites  the  stomach  and  bowels  should  be  taken  out  and
slit  up.  The  parasite  does  not  often  occur  in  the  stomach,  but  may  be
found  firmly  attached  to  the  wall  in  any  part  of  the  small  intestines.  The
mucous  membrane  of  the  intestines  should  be  examined  in  a  good  light,
inch  by  inch,  with  a  magnifying  glass,  and  if  necessary  washed  with  run-
ning water   to   clear   away   mucus,   partly   digested   food,   etc.
The  parasite  can  be  recognized  curled  up  in  a  spiral  or  lying  straight  in
groups  of  four  or  five  to  a  dozen.  They  may  be  evenly  distributed  through-
out the  small  intestine.  If  the  examination  be  made  shortly  after  death,
each  parasite  is  found  firmly  attached  in  the  center  of  a  red,  inflamed  spot;
wherever  the  contents  of  the  bowels  are  cherry  colored  from  blood  staining
the  parasites  can  be  found  most  numerously.  The  whole  of  the  small
intestine  is,  as  a  rule,  inflamed  and  thickened.  In  many  cases  round  worms
and  tapeworms  are  also  present,  especially  in  young  dogs.
Symptoms  and  Diagnosis  of  the  Disease.
Hookworm  disease  has  been  looked  on  as  essentially  a  disease  of  sport-
ing dogs,  especially  hounds.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  all  breeds  are  equally  sus-
ceptible, and  it  is  simply  due  to  the  fact  that  sporting  dogs  are  generally
raised  and  kept  where  the  conditions  favor  the  parasites,  that  it  has  been
so  considered.  Dogs  at  all  ages  are  liable  to  become  infected,  but  grow-
ing puppies  from  a  few  weeks  to  a  year  old  are  more  susceptible  to  the
effects  of  the  worms.
Symptoms  are  unfortunately  indefinite  in  the  majority  of  cases.  The
dog  may  show  signs  of  worms  and  with  treatment  pass  round  worms  and
tapeworms,  but  fails  to  pick  up  and  develop  as  expected.  Young  puppies
become  anemic,  with  pallid  gums,  distended  abdomen,  injected  eyes  and
a  hot,  dry  nose.  The  usual  treatment  with  vermifuges  and  purgatives
produces  a  persistent  diarrhea,  the  worm  toxins  produce  convulsions,  coma
and  death  in  a  very  few  days.  Older  dogs,  from  six  to  twelve  months  old,
pass  through   these  stages  more  slowly.
The  appetite  is  capricious  or  voracious,  the  gums  become  spongy  and
bleed  easily  to  the  touch,  development  of  teeth  is  arrested — in  several
cases  I  have  observed  crumbling  of  the  enamel  due  to  faulty  assimilation
of  the  necessary  constituents  and  to  the  presence  of  a  foul-smelling  green
deposit.  Chorea  may  develop  suddenly  and  progresses  in  violence  until
death  occurs.  In  the  course  of  time  diarrhea  sets  in,  which  increases  in
severity  until  blood-stained  or  tarry-looking  movements  occur  several  times
in  the  hour.  Rapid  emaciation,  exhaustion  and  death  follow  in  a  few  days,
once  dysentery  is  established.
Absolute  diagnosis  can  only  be  made  by  microscopical  examinations
of  the  stools.  This,  however,  involves  considerable  technical  difficulties,
and  for  practical  purposes  may  be  counted  out.
Treatment.
In  nursing  and  newly  weaned  puppies  is  almost  out  of  the  question,  as
drastic  remedies  cannot  be  used  safely.  The  remedies  recommended  by
government  experts  for  uncinariasis  in  man  are  thymol,  male  fern,  oil  of
turpentine  and  chloroform,  singly  or  in  combination,  followed  by  active
purgatives.  In  the  dog  it  is  advisable  to  give  all  vermifuge  medicines  in
capsules  or  coated  pills,  to  prevent  nausea  and  vomiting,  which  occurs  when
medicines  are  given  in  fluid  form.  In  the  dog  better  results  are  produced
by  giving  daily  doses  before  feeding  each  morning.  In  this  way  dysentery
is  not  so  liable  to  be  set  up  as  where  full  treatments  are  given.
Thymol  is  looked  on  as  a  specific  in  the  human  being,  but  is  a  most
unreliable  drug  for  the  dog.  In  a  number  of  puppies  of  the  same  age,  weight
,  and  condition  I  have  found  some  who  would  tolerate  large  doses,  while  in
others  extremely  small  doses  would  produce  persistent  vomiting,  convul-
sions and  death.  Extract  of  male  fern  in  combination  with  turpentine,
chloroform  and  castor  oil  or  glycerine  is  much  safer  given  in  small  daily
doses.
During  treatment  tonics,  such  as  iron,  arsenic  and  strychnine,  arsenite
of  copper,  etc.,  should  be  given,  and  to  sustain  strength  cod  liver  oil,  raw
meat  and  milk  and  eggs  should  be  fed  generously.  To  control  diarrhea
bismuth  subgallate  may  be  given  in  large  doses;  it  acts  as  an  intestinal
antiseptic,  as  well  as  being  an  astringent.
As  a  tonic,  instead  of  drugs  given  in  this  article,  the  writer  of  this
book  would  use  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills,  in  all  cases.
As  to  Prevention.
Commencing  with  the  egg,  it  has  been  found  that  they  are  formed  and
undergo  changes  while  in  the  oviduct  of  the  female.  After  being  passed
out  of  the  dog's  bowels  with  the  stools  they  undergo  further  changes  in
surface  soil,  the  time  occupied  depending  on  the  suitability  of  the  surround-
ings, the  essential  features  being  moisture  and  favorable  temperatures.
Where  conditions  are  favorable  the  eggs  are  hatched  out  in  a  few  days,  and
after  the  embryos  have  undergone  several  moultings  they  are  ready  to
infect  dogs  by  means  of  drinking  water  or  contaminated  food.
The  important  features  to  remember  are:  (1)  That  the  eggs  are  hatch-
ed out,  not  while  in  the  intestine  of  the  dog,  but  after  being  passed  out  with
the  stools.  From  this  it  follows,  then,  that  every  individual  hookworm
present  in  the  intestines  of  the  dog'represents  infection  by  a  single  embryo.
In  other  words,  the  parasites  do  not  actually  increase  in  number  while
in  the  dog's  intestines.  (2)  Moisture  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  hatch-
ing out  of  the  eggs.  Drinking  troughs  and  contaminated  water  supply  are,
therefore,  rightly  considered  as  the  chief  sources  of  infection.
From  these  facts  it  can  be  seen  that  the  essentials  of  prevention  of
hookworm  disease  are  absolute  cleanliness  in  every  particular,  especially  as
regards  feeding  pans  and  water  vessels,  and  disinfection  of  all  excretions
and  soiled  bedding.  When  an  animal  dies  the  body  should  be  buried  in
quicklime,  or,  better  still,  cremated.  Above  all,  dampness  must  be  avoided
in  every  possible  way.
For  disinfecting  sleeping  quarters  dry  sawdust  impregnated  with  a
reliable  disinfectant  is  of  great  value,  as  it  absorbs  moisure  and  when
brushed  out  carries  away  and  destroys  the  eggs  of  the  parasite.  Woodwork
may  be  whitewashed  or  painted  and  all  floors  should  be  cleaned  out  at
least  once  daily.  Earth  floors  should  be  covered  with  boards  or  concrete.
As  damp  soil  is  the  medium  in  which  the  embryos  develop,  outdoor  runs
should  be  dressed  with  quicklime,  well  drained  and  covered  with  several
inches  of  furnace  ashes  or  crushed  coke.  This  when  alternately  rolled  and
sprinkled-  with  crude  petroleum  will  in  time  form  a  waterproof  asphalt-
like surface  which  will  carry  off  water  according  to  the  direction  in  which
it  is  sloped.  All  food  and  drinking  water  should  be  given  in  clean  pans,
and  under  no  consideration  should  dogs  be  allowed  to  eat  from  the  floor
of  sleeping  quarters  or  from  the  ground  in  the  runs.  To  prevent  mud  from
being  carried  into  the  kennels  on  the  feet  of  kennel  men  or  visitors  where
the  surrounding  grounds  are  liable  to  be  muddy,  board  walks  and  a  door
mat  and  scraper  at  the  kennel  entrance  should  be  laid  down.
Confinement  to  kennel  quarters  in  some  districts  seems  to  be  the  only
safe  plan  to  avoid  the  disease,  as,  when  allowed  to  roam  at  liberty,  dogs
will  drink  from  stagnant  of  surface  water  and  thus  become  infected.
Suspected  cases  should  be  isolated  whenever  possible.
Hookworm  disease  is  not  necessarily  nor  commonly  fatal  to  adult
dogs;  in  fact,  in  Western  Pennsylvania  it  is  the  rule  rather  than  the  ex-
ception to  find  a  few  hookworms  in  dogs  dead  from  other  causes.  It  is
such  cases  that  constitute  a  danger  to  young  and  susceptible  dogs.  When
the  method  of  reproduction  of  the  hookworm  is  taken  into  consideration,
it  can  be  understood  that  when  reinfection  is  prevented  by  following  the
precautions  suggested,  it  is  quite  possible  for  a  dog  to  be  entirely  freed
from  hookworms,  provided  his  vitality  be  kept  up  to  the  highest  standard
during  the  period  necessary  to  get  rid  of  the  worms  by  cautious  and  per-
sistent treatment."
Indigestion  (Dyspepsia) — This  means  that  food  taken  into  the  stom-
ach is  not  digested  or  made  fit  for  the  nourishment  of  the  body,  and  that
the  stomach  has  altogether  or  partially  lost  its  power  of  performing  its
most  important  office.  This  is  caused  in  various  ways;  want  of  exercise,
improper  food,  or  having' been  fed  irregularly.  Having  been  overfed  or
having  fasted  too  long  will  produce  indigestion,  but  to  cause  a  serious
attack,  the  causes  must  have  been  of  some  standing.
Symptoms. — A  vitiated  appetite,  wholesome  food  he  will  turn  his  nose
up  at,  or  eat  it  mincingly,  with  a  preference  for  filth  and  garbage.  Con-
siderable thirst  it  present,  and  often  vomiting.  Flatulence  is  also  an  ac-
companiment and  the  gums  become  inflamed,  and  breath  is  foul  and  offensive
when  of  long  standing.     Indigestion  causes  many  other  forms  of  disease,
following  neglected  cases — attacks  of  diarrhea,  sometimes  alternating  with
fits  of  constipation,  as  derangement  of  the  bowels  are  almost  inseparate
from  it.  Confirmed  constipation  sometimes  exists.  The  dog  may  become
excessively  fat  and  suffer  from  asthma  accompanied  by  a  cough.  The
dog's  temper  is  often  snappish   during  the  attack.
Indigestion  is  the  cause  of  many  other  forms  of  disease,  which  are
sure  to  follow  neglected  cases — derangement  of  the  bowels  being  almost
inseparable  from  it.  Diarrhea  attacks  occur,  often  alternating  with  fits
of  constipation;  or  confirmed  constipation  may  exist.  A  dog  will  often
become  excessively  fat  and  suffer  from  asthma  and  asthmatic  cough.
A  secondary  symptom  is  skin  disease  in  one  form  or  another.  In  treat-
ing for  indigestion  tho  most  important  thing  to  do  is  to  remove  the  cause
or  causes.  Give  a  sufficiency  only,  of  plain,  wholesome  food,  and  keep
within  the  dog's  reach  a  supply  of  clean,  fresh  water.  Remedies  must  be
given  according  to  existing  circumstances — diarrhea  for  instance,  treated
as  recommended  under  that  head.  The  main  object  is,  however,  to  tone  up
the  stomach  and  get  this  organ  again  into  good  working  shape.  Use  the
following  aperient  bolus:
Barbadoes    aloes    15   grains
Jalap 1   dram
Towdered  ginger 1    dram
Castile    soap    2   drams
Make  up  info  a  mass  and  divide  into  l-r>  grain  balls.  Dose,  one,  two
or  three  balls,  according  to  size  of  dog.
When  bowels  have  freely  acted  then  give  the  following,  twice  daily,
until  health  has  returned:
Towdered  rhubarb    1   scruple
Powdered   ginger    1   scruple
Extract  of  gentian    4   scruples
Divide  into  twenty-four  pills  and  give  one  to  four  pills  twice  daily.
If  much  flatulence,  put  a  little  bicarbonate  of  soda  on  back  of
tongue  and  let  dog  have  water.
With  careful  diet  and  exercise,  these  means  will  be  found  successful.
Add  a  little  lime  water  to  the  milk  that  is  given  to  drink.  By  treating
the  patient  thus  and  paying  strict  attention  to  his  dietary  and  exercise,
the  disease  will  soon  yield.
I  have  used  with  good  results  in  lieu  of  the  above  pill,  Clayton's  Di-
gestive Pills  and  believe  to  be  very  good.
The  following  article  I  found  somewhere,  and  as  it  is  worth  repro-
ducing here  entire,  I  give  it  space  in  this  book:
"As  in  man,  and  many  animals,  indigestion  in  the  dog  may  be  acute,
chronic  and  passive.  In  acute  indigestion  the  attack  is  sudden  and  painful,
and  is  the  result  of  an  overloaded  stomach.  The  disorder  is  called  chronic
when  the  dog  suffers  for  a  continued  time  and  his  stomach  and  intestines
are  in  a  weakened  condition.  It  is  active  when  the  attack  is  brought  on
by  some  extrinsic  cause,  passive  when  it  is  the  result  of  some  other  disease,
or  is  due  to  an  intrinsic  cause.
"The  breeds  of  dogs  most  likely  to  be  affected  by  indigestion  are
the  pug,  the  Japanese  spaniel,  the  black  and  tan,  the  greyhound,  the
Yorkshire  terrier,  the  French  poodle  and  the  fox  terrier.
"Pugs  are  probably  the  greatest  sufferers.  As  a  rule,  they  are  en-
couraged in  laziness,  while  sweetmeats  are  fed  to  them  indiscriminately,
so  that  it  is  not  surprising  they  should  become  fat  and  dyspeptic.
"The  foods  which  are  richest  in  fats  and  those  which  are  prone  to
fermentation  are  the  most  indigestible,  but  it  is  not  so  much  the  nature  of
the  food  as  it  is  the  quantity  consumed  at  one  time  which  injures  an
animal's  stomach.  Small  dogs  are  more  voracious  in  their  feeding  than
large  dogs.  Some  dogs  never  or  seldom  get  a  bone  to  gnaw.  The  dog  is  a
carnivorous  animal,  and  in  a  state  of  nature  he  lives  only  on  the  flesh  of
other  animals.  As  he  swallows  his  food  with  but  little  mastication,  Nature
has  provided  him  with  a  desire  to  gnaw  the  bones  into  small  pieces.  "When
these  small  pieces  are  taken  into  the  stomach  they  bruise  and  lacerate  the
food  until  it  is  made  thoroughly  digestible.  It  is  believed  that  70  per
cent  of  the  cases  of  indigestion  in  dogs  are  due  to  their  being  deprived
of  bones  to  gnaw.  Domestication  has  to  a  great  extent  modified  the  habits
of  the  dog.  Some  pets  are  pampered  and  spoiled  to  the  degree  that  they
will  eat  only  certain  foods,  which  must  be  fed  to  them  with  a  fork  or  from
some  particular  dish.  Such  peculiarities  are  predisposing  causes  to  indi-
gestion.
"A  symptom  of  acute  indigestion  is  vomiting  after  feeding.  Later
this  is  followed  by  general  dullness;  the  dog  isolates  himself  from  his
friends,  his  eyes  .roll  with  an  expression  of  fear.  The  muzzle  may  be  dry.
Rumbling  sounds  in  the  bowel  sare  heard,  accompanied  by  distension  of
the  abdomen,  which  is  filled  with  gas.  If  the  animal  is  forced  to  move,
he  shows  great  uneasiness  and  is  stiff  in  his  posterior  limbs,  his  back
arched  to  relieve  the  tension  of  the  abdominal  muscles.  If  the  abdomen  is
manipulated  he  evinces  acute  pain.  The  bowels  are  constipated..  These
symptoms  may  continue  for  an  hour  or  more,  and  the  attack  may  pass  off
as  suddenly  as  it  began,  or  it  may  last  for  some  length  of  time,  during
which  the  dog  suffers  the  greatest  pain.  Then  the  pain  ceases,  his  eyes
brighten,  he  becomes  cheerful,  and  off  he  goes  for  a  run,  apparently  per-
fectly well.
"The  symptoms  of  chronic  indigestion  are  the  same  as  those  of  the
acute  attack,  only  they  are  less  intense  and  they  continue  for  days  at  a
time.  The  dog  often  grows  irritable  to  a  state  of  fenzy,  and  will  run  about
snapping  and  biting,  exposing  himself  to  be  shot  for  mad  by  some  over-
zealous  policeman.
"As  regards  treatment,  it  is  more  important  to  regulate  the  diet
than  to  give  medicines.  Feed  the  sufferer  once  or  twice  a  day,  not  oftener,