the  lower  animals  it  is  generally  used  to  mean  premature  parturition  as
well.  Abortion  is  comparatively  rare  in  dogs,  but  premature  whelping,
especially  just  a  week  or  so  before  the  pups  are  due,  is  by  no  means  un-
common. The  causes  of  abortion  and  premature  parturition  are  various.  A
low  diet,  causing  extreme  paverty  when  the  system  requires  extra  support
for  the  growth  of  the  unborn  pups,  and  the  secretion  of  milk  for  them
afterwards,  is  likely  to  cause  it;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  plethoric  state
of  the  body  from  over-feeding  and  want  of  exercise  is  also  a  likely  cause,
and  very  severe  exercise,  jumping  from  a  height  or  over  fences,  and,  what
is  too  common,  blows  or  kicks  on  the  abdomen.  It  may  also  be  brought
on  by  drinking  foul  water,  eating  putrid  food  or  anything  likely  to  cause
inflammation  of  the  bowels,  violent  diarrhea,  and  consequent  straining.
Young  bitches  bred  from  before  the  system  is  matured,  and  old  worn-out
ones,  are  most  likely  to  abort.  Preventive  measures  consist  in  general
attention  to  health,  both  in  regard  to  the  food  and  water  given  and  the
sanitary  condition  of  the  kennel,  and  the  permitting  of  regular,  but  not
violent,  exercise,  and  in  selecting  only  for  breeding  purposes  bitches  that
are  matured  and  in  vigorous  health.  When  a  bitch  has  had  her  pups
before  the  full  time  she  should  not  be  again  bred  from  until  at  least  one
period  of  oestrum  has  passed.
Anaemia  (Poverty  of  Blood)  is  shown  by  paleness  of  the  mucous
membranes,  weak  and  slow  pulse  and  heart-beat,  lack  of  energy,  depression
and  lassitude.  As  the  disease  progresses,  the  eye  sinks,  becoming  dull,  the
gait  is  staggering,  the  breathing  becomes  labored  and  wheezy,  and  the  dog
gradually  sinks.
The  causes  are  poor  food,  exhaustive  demands  on  stud  dogs,  excessive
secretion  of  milk,  and  allowing  bitches  to  suckle  puppies  too  long.  Anaemia
may  also  be  the  result  of  some  other  disease  impoverishing  the  system,
and  it  is  not  infrequently  a  consequence  of  the  dog  harboring  worms.  Give
in  small  quantities  and  frequently  the  most  nourishing  foods — milk,  flesh,
broths,  etc. — pepsin  porci  to  assist  digestion,  and  wine  of  iron  or  syrup  of
phosphates  as  a  tonic.  Sergeant's  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  condition  pills
are  a  good  tonic.  At  the  same  time  see  that  the  dog  is  warmly  housed
and  that  he  gets  plenty  of  sunlight  and  fresh  air.
Asphyxia. — Inability  to  breathe  as  the  result  of  nearly  drowning.  In
treating  never  attempt  to  make  dog  swallow  while  in  an  unconscious  state;
inject  stimulants  under  the  skin,  such  as  from  ten  'to  twenty  drops  of
brandy.  Dash  hot  and  cold  water  over  the  head  alternately  and  make  the
attempt  of  artificial  respiration  as  follows,  when  due  to  partial  drowning:
Hold  the  dog  up  with  his  head  downward  for  a  minute,  so  as  to  allow  the
water  to  run  out  of  his  lungs,  then  place  the  dog  on  his  back,  draw  the
tongue  out,  and  with  the  hand  placed  on  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  where
the  latter  meets  the  abdomen,  press  downwards  and  forwards  with  some
little  force,  then  suddenly  raise  the  hand  to  allow  the  chest  to  expand.
This  should  be  repeated  every  three  or  four  seconds.
Bladder,  Inflammation  of  the. — The  symptoms  are  great  pain  on  pres-
sure over  the  region  of  the  bladder;  the  urine  passed  is  scant  in  quantity
but  at  frequent  intervals,  and  evidently  with  great  pain.  It  frequently  comes
from  a  blow  but  is  also  produced  by  long  exposure  to  cold  or  wet,  and  often
the  result  of  giving  too  much  cantharides  and  turpentine.  Sometimes  due
to  stricture  of  the  urethra  (urinary  passage)  or  calculi  (stone).  The
treatment  consists  of  first  giving  a  brisk  purgative,  and  should  this  not  act
it  should  be  assisted  by  clysters  of  luke-warm  water  or  thin  gruel,  or  a
hot  bath.  The  acute  symptoms  having  passed,  give  3  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  benzoic
acid  in  pill  form  three  times  a  day.  If  the  urine  is  not  freely  passed  the
catheter  should  be  used  in  the  manner  detailed  under  heading  of  Paralysis
of  the  Bladder.  When  the  bowels  have  been  opened,  give  a  dose  every
six  hours  of  the  following  "fever  mixture."
Powdered   nitre    1    dram
Sweet  spirit  of  nitre 1'2    ounce
Mindererus    spirit    1  "2    ounce
Wine    of   antimony    1    dram
Tincture  of  digitalis    y2    dram
Water    4   ounces
Mix.     Dose  for  a  dog,  25-lb.  to   30-lb.  weight,   one  tablespoonful  every
four  hours  in  a  little  gruel.     Smaller  dogs  not  quite  so  much.     From
50-lbs.  up  a  tablespoonful  and  a  half  as  a  dose.
•
The  patient  will  experience  relief  of  the  parts  are  bathed  continuously
with  a  warm  infusion  of  poppy-heads,  or  warm  water  alone,  care  being
taken  that  he  is  not  afterward  exposed  to  cold.  The  clog's  diet  should  be
light  and  nourishing.
Bladder,  Paralysis —  of This  affection  is  shown  by  the  constant  efforts
of  the  dog  to  urinate  and  inability  to  do  so,  the  water  coming  away  in
dribbles.  It  may  arise  from  stone  in  the  bladder.  A  common  cause  is  over-
distension of  the  bladder  caused  by  keeping  dogs  where  they  will  not
urinate.  Some  dogs  will  not  do  so  when  shut  up  in  a  room,  or  when  on
the  chain;  hence  the  necessity,  too  often  neglected,  of  taking  dogs  off  the
benches  at  exhibitions  at  regular  intervals.  This  compulsory  retention  of
urine  produces  spasm  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  paralysis — loss  of  the
necessary  muscular  power — follows.  It  may  also  be  the  result  of  injury  to
the  spine,  or  of  debilitating  disease.  The  effect  of  continued  hot  fomen-
tations should  be  tried,  and  if  these  -fail,  the  urine  should  be  drawn  off  by
means  of  a  catheter.  Passing  a  catheter  is  a  very  simple  matter.  The
dog  should  be  placed  upon  his  back,  and  the  prepuce  pressed  back,  so  as  to
bring  the  penis  into  view;  the  catketer  should  then  be  dressed  with  a  little
olive  oil  or  vaseline  and  passed  gently  into  the  opening  at  the  point  of  the
penis.  This  will  introduce  it  into  the  bladder,  when  the  piece  of  wire  with
which  the  instrument  is  provided  should  be  withdrawn.  Should  the  urine
not  flow  freely,  the  dog  can  be  stood  upon  its  legs,  keeping  the  catheter
in  position.  If  a  catheter  is  not  at  hand,  pressure  with  both  hands  through
the  abdominal  walls  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  will  empty  it  of  its  con-
tents. If  paralysis  of  the  hind  legs  is  present,  an  assistant  should  raise
the  body  from  the  ground,  by  means  of  the  tail,  whilst  the  operator  is  press-
ing the  sides.
During  convalescence  give  barley-water  to  drink,  and  soft  nourishing
food — porridge  and  milk,  broth  and  bread,  etc.
The  following  on  this  subject,  is  valuable:  This  disease  occurs  some-
times from  keeping  dogs  of  very  clean  habits  shut  up,  with  no  opportunity
to  relieve  themselves.  The  bladder  becomes  overdistended,  paralyzing  the
parts.  It  may  also  be  the  result  of  a  general  paralysis  following  an  injury
to  the  spine,  the  brain  or  some  part  of  the  nervous  system.  The  dog  at  first
is  unable  to  pass  water  and  later  it  dribbles  from  him.  The  first  thing
to  do  is  to  relieve  the  bladder.  If  there  is  no  mechanical  obstruction  this
can  be  done  by  pressure  over  the  walls  of  the  abdomen.  If  this  fails,  a
catheter  must  be  passed;  in  fact,  it  is  the  safest  thing  to  do,  for  when  an
attempt  is  made  to  empty  he  bladder  by  applying  force  from  the  outsir.e
there  is  danger  of  rupturing  the  parts.  The  catheter  for  a  small  dog
should  be  No.  00,  for  terriers  No.  1,  for  setters  and  pointers  No.  2.  In
the  event  of  a  small  gravel  lodging  in  the  passage,  it  is  usually  removed
by  carefully  passing  a  small  grooved  silver  probe.  To  tone  up  the  bladder,
nux  vomica  is  the  mast  useful  drug.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  seven  drops
of  the  tincture  three  times  a  day  in  a  teaspoonful  of  water  given  "after  feed-
ing.
Bleeding  From  the  Stomach The  vomiting  of  blood  is  not  of  ordinary
occurrence  and  may  be  the  result  of  many  causes.  If  due  to  a  recent. in-
jury or  breaking  down  of  the  tissues,  it  will  be  bright  red  in  color,  if  the
blood  is  coming  from  the  vens  it  will  be  of  darker  hue,  and  if  it  has  re-
mained in  the  stomach  some  time  it  will  be  of  coffee  color.  In  treating  give
the  stomach  at  least  twenty-four  hours'  rest  or  feed  only  milk  and  water,
and  every  three  hours  give  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  of  the
following:  Tincture  thalaspi  twenty-four  drops,  liquor  bismuth  one-half
ounce.     Water  to  make  three  ounces.
BOILS —
These  are  similar  to  the  boils  in  human  beings  and  are  due  to  the
same  causes,  that  is,  they  indicate  either  a  poverty  of  the  system  and  a  gen-
eral weakness,  or  they  may  be  the  result  of  plethora  and  too  much  blood.
They  also  follow  diseases  like  distemper  and  are  not  uncommonly  induced
by  worms.  Boils  are  very  painful  and  make  the  dog  cross.  They  appear,
usually,  where  the  skin  is  thinnest.  Their  first  appearance  is  in  the  form
of  small  red  swellings,  which  enlarge,  become  hot  and  painful  and  even-
tually break  and  discharge  their  contents.  They  usually  appear  on  the
inside  of  the  thighs  and  bellies  of  young  puppies  when  suffering  with  dis-
temper or  worms.  If  accompanying  distemper  they  should  not  be  treated,
but  at  other  times  the  proper  thing  to  do  is  to  reform  the  diet,  give  more
green  food,  bathe  oftener,  exercise  more  and  when  the  boils  are  soft  and
ripe  open  them  with  a  sharp  knife  and  dress  with  an  antiseptic  solution.
Blood,  Poverty  of  the. — See  Anaemia.
Bites. — A  great  injustice  is  done  to  a  great  many  dogs  by  the  old  say-
ing that  "dogs  delight  to  bark  and  bite,"  for  there  are  very  many  that  do
not  delight  in  either,  but  are  to  the  contrary,  properly  behaved  dogs  in  this
respect.  Some  clogs  do,  however,  but  generally  in  self  defense,  or  at  sup-
posed call  of  duty.  Should  your  dog  get  bitten,  wash  the  wound  with  tepid
water,  press  out  any  blood,  and  pour  a  little  of  friar's  balsam,  or  compound
tincture  of  myrh  on  it.
Since  the  above  was  written,  I  was  bitten  on  the  left  hand  in  fourteen
places,  by  a  Bulldog  I  was  showing  in  the  ring,  at  the  1916  dog  show  at
Louisville,  Ky.,  State  Fair,  really  the  worst  chewing  up  I  ever  got.  Was
taken  to  the  hospital  near  the  dog  show.  The  doctor  washed  the  hand,
then  dressed  it  with  tincture  of  Iodine,  and  then  applied  a  healing  salve
called  "Unguentine,"  (to  be  had  at  any  drug  store),  repeating  this  daily
while  show  lasted,  and  I  done  the  same  for  a  week  after  home.  The  hand
wrapped  with  cotton  and  bandage,  and  the  result  was  my  hand  got  entirely
well.  I  will  just  mention,  however,  that  the  poor  dog,  after  home,  as  at
the  show,  where  for  some  cause  he  suddenly  went  off  his  base,  continued
here  to  be  crazy,  did  not  try  again  to  bite  me  (we  were  friends),  but
did  bite  every  dog  he  got  at  here,  and  suddenly  died  three  days  later,
being  buried  by  me  in  my  back  yard,  under  an  apple  tree — and  I  miss
poor  "Wrinks."  I  find  that  many  doctors  now  use  tincture  of  Iodine,
the  first  thing,  on  a  bite  or  wound,  in  place  of  cauterizing,  and  I  strongly
advise  doing  so,  and  then  the  salve.  The  first  thing  to  do  if  you  are
bitten,  is  to  suck  the  bite,  if  on  any  part  of  your  body  you  can  get  at  with
your  mouth,  and  spit  this  out,  which  abstracts  any  poison — if  any  poison,
from  the  bite.  Don't  be  afraid  of  a  dog's  bite,  don't  get  scared,  the  only
danger  is,  a  small  percentage  of  blood  poison  setting  in,  but  if  your  own
blood  is  in  good  condition  there  is  no  danger.  "Wrinks"  case,  with  almost
every  veterinarian,  would  have  been  a  sure  case  of  rabies,  but  as  I  don't
believe  in  this,  I  am  yet  here  writing  this  article.
Instead  of  cauterizing  a  bite,  which  always  makes  a  nasty  looking
wound,  I  much  prefer  to  use  the  tincture  of  Iodine  (using  a  small  brush),
or  if  this  is  not  on  hand,  then  apply  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen,  which  will
do  all  the  cauterizing  will  do.
Should  your  dog  be  bitten  by  a  strange  dog  and  any  suspicion  exists  of
so-called  rabies  in   the  strange   dog,   immediately  use   the   tincture  of  Iron,
or  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen,  and  isolate  the  dog  until  the  time  has  passed
for  any  fear  of  hydrophobia  developing.  This  advice  is  given  to  those
who  believe  in  the  so-termed  hydrophobia,  and  you  are  referred  now  to
Rabies,  where  I  give  fully  my  own  belief  on  this  subject,  as  well  as  the
ideas  of  others.  In  case  there  is  a  tear,  it  may  be  necessary  to  bandage
or  draw  together  with  a  few  stitches  of  silk  thread.
Bowels,  Inflammation  of  (Enteritis;  Peritonitis). — This  is  so  ably
treated  by  Dalziel,  and  by  experience  I  know  it  to  be  good,  that  I  here  re-
produce his  article  in  full.  The  best  plan,  however,  is  to  at  once  send  for
a  veterinarian,  providing  you  have  one  who  understands  or  has  made  a
specialty  of  treating  dogs — anyhow,  get  the  best  one  in  your  locality  and
don't  stop  to  think  of  what  it  will  cost,  for  you  owe  it  to  your  dog  to  help
him  out  of  his  trouble  if  such  a  thing  is  possible:
"The  severity  and  very  dangerous  charcter  of  this  disease  in  the  dog
is  such  that  perhaps  the  very  best  advice  that  can  be  given  to  the  amateur
who  finds  his  valuable  dog  attacked  by  it  is,  send  for  a  qualified  veterinary
surgeon  without  delay.  The  owner  may,  however,  he  possessed  of  sufficient
self-confidence  as  to  wish  to  try  his  own  skill  in  treating  the  disease,  or
the  animal  may  not  be  considered  of  sufficient  value  to  incure  the  expense
of  employing  a  professional  man,  although  there  may  be  every  desire  to
save  the  animal's  life;  and  if  I  can  help  in  any  such  commendable  endeavor
without  encouraging  useless  and  ignorant  experiments  at  the  cost  of  torture
to  the  dog,  I  shall  feel  that  I  have  been  of  some  little  service.  Whatever
course  is  determined  on,  whether  home  treatment  or  the  calling  in  of  pro-
fessional aid,  the  decision  should  not  be  taken  till  the  symptoms  have  been
carefully  and  minutely  observed,  and  the  greatest  attention  must  be  paid
to  them,  else  there  is  every  fear  of  the  amateur  confounding  it  with  and
treating  it  as  colic,  a  disease  which,  although  strongly  resembling  inflamma-
tion in  some  of  its  symptoms,  differs  widely  in  others,  and  requires  totally
different  treatment.  Colic,  if  neglected  or  if  wrongly  treated,  may,  and
frequently  does,  end  in  inflammation,  but  it  is  in  itself  a  distinct  ailment,
and  the  same  remark  equally  applies  to  constipation  or  obstruction  of  the
bowels.  As  inflammation  of  the  bowels  or  enteritis  is  one  of  the  most  fatal
diseases  to  which  the  dog  is  liable — frequently  carrying  him  off  very  quick-
ly— no  half  measures  will  do  for  it;  but,  having  ascertained  clearly  from
the  prevailing  symptoms  that  the  disease  is  actually  present,  remedial  meas-
ures must  be  adopted  with  promptitude  and  energy.  The  main  causes  of  the
disease  are  irregular  or  improper  diet,  or  it  may  be  irritation  caused  by  the
dog  having  swallowed  some  hard  indegestible  substance;  exposure  to  cold
and  wet  may  produce  it,  and  it  is  sometimes  the  result  of  ill-usage,  such  as
a  kick.
"Inflamation  of  the  bowels  may  be  distinguished  from  colic  in  being
more  gradual  in  its  approach,  and  is  always  ushered  in  by  general  feverish-
ness;  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  eyes  red  and  inflamed,  and  the  whole
countenance  is  expressive  of  great  anxiety;  shivering  fits  occur,  the  belly  is
hard  and  distended,  and  in  the  surface  hot  to  the  touch;  the  urine  is  gener-
ally scanty  and  high  colored.  As  in  colic,  when  standing,  the  back  is  arched,
the  feet  are  drawn  in  toward  each  other,  and  the  tail  is  tightly  tucked  be-
tween  the  legs,  or  the  clog  may  steal  into  a  quiet  corner,  stretch  his  legs
out  before  and  behind,  and  crouch  with  his  belly  on  the  ground,  probably
finding  temporary  relief  by  bringing  it  in  contact  with  the  cold  floor  or
ground;  the  dOg  may,  at  the  same  time,  be  observed  to  frequently  turn  an
anxious  face  toward  his  flanks.
"Another  safe  and  pretty  certain  way  of  distinguishing  between  enteri-
tis and  simple  obstruction  or  colic  is  by  pressing  the  hand  along  the  belly;
in  the  latter  disease,  especially  colic,  the  rubbing  gives  relief,  whereas  in
inflammation  it  evidently  causes  acute  pain;   the  cry  of  pain  given  by  the
dog  in  this  disease  is  shorter  and  sharper  than  the  rather  prolonged  howl
in  colic,  but  to  distinguish  by  this  symptom  would  require  finer  discrimi-
nation  than   can   be  reasonably   expected    from   the   comparatively   inexper-
ienced, for  whom  I  presume  to  write.     I  may  here  mention  the  fact  that
enteritis  is  very  commonly  a   complication  of  that   'scorge  of   the  kennel/
distemper,   and   this   fact  alone   sufficiently   shows   the   folly   of  trusting    to-
any  single  medicine,  pill,  powder,  potion,  or  any  so-called  specific  whatever
for  the  cure  of  that  disease.     The  treatment  proper  in   the  disease  under'
consideration  consists  in  getting  the  bowels  relieved  as  speedily  as  possi-
ble by  the  mildest  means   that  can  be  used,   constipation   being   generally
present;  for  this  purpose  the  use  of  clysters  every  fifteen  minutes,  as  recom-
mended  in   obstruction   of  the  bowels,   should   be  resorted   to,   and   the  in-
jections must  be  used  gently  and  with  as  little  fuss  and  annoyance  to  the
patient  as  possible.     When  the  clysters  begin  to  take  effect,  the  evacuation
of   the  bowels   should   be  assisted   by  a   dose   of   castor   oil.      From   six   to
twelve  leeches,   according  to  the  size  and   strength   of  the  dog,   should   be
applied   to   the   belly,   and    after   they   have   filled   themselves   the   bleeding
from  the  bites  may  be  encouraged  by  bathing  the  whole  surrounding  parts
freely   and   continuously   with   warm   water.      Many   of-  the   best   writers   on
dogs  recommend   giving  calomel  and  opium   combined,   and   it  may  appear-
presumptuous  in  me  to  offer  a  contrary  opinion,  but  experientia  docet.     I
have  given  calomel  to  dogs  in  this  disease  and  many  others,  but  I  do  not
think   I   ever   once   gave   it  without   making   the   patient  worse;    so   I   have
long  discarded  it,  in  the  firm  belief  that  it  is  not  a  medicine  at  all  suited
to  the  dog,  and  I  am  quite  certain  from  my  own  experience,  and  feel  sure
the  best  veterinarians  will   bear  me  out,   that  the  abusive   use  of  calomel
and   other   forms   of  mercury,   given   too   often   in   immense   and   poisonous
doses  to  the  dog,  by  country-  farriers  and  others  ignorant  of  its  properties,
and    who    work    by    the    rule    of    thumb,    is    not    infrequently    the    cause    of
inflammation   of   the  bowels.      Instead  of  calomel,   I  have  in   several   cases
used  the  following  with  excellent  effect:
Take  true  James'   Powder 3   grains
Powdered  Opium 14    grain
In    one   ppwder.      Give    every    two   hours    till    three   are   given;    large-
sized  dogs  require  double  that  dose.
"If  happily  the  dog  gets  over  the  attack,  with  signs  of  returning  health
great  weakness  will  be  evident,  and  this  must  be  met  by  good  nursing  and
a  generous,  but  easily  assimilated,   diet.     Beef  tea,  thickened,   with  bread,
rice,  etc.,  will  answer  well.  The  diet  must  be  so  varied  as  to  keep  the
bowels  open  without  the  use  of  medicine."
When  well  on  the  road  to  health  great  progress  will  be  accelerated  by
giving  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills  for  twenty  to  thirty  days.  They  contain  no
"dope,"  (unlike  many  others),  make  the  dog  eat,  and  get  him  back  to
health,  flesh,  and  spirits.
To  allay  the  pain,  give  5  gr.  to  10  gr.  of  chloral,  with  5  to  30  drops
of  tincture  of  opium;   also  apply  hot  flannels  to  the  abdomen.
The  following  treatise  on  this  trouble  was  written  especially  for  this
book  by  Dent,  and  I  consider  it,  also,  very  valuable:
"An  affection  of  the  small  intestines.  This  disease  is  of  the  most
dangerous  character  and  unfortunately  prevalent.  It  will  carry  off  a  dog
in  a  few  hours,  and  in  its  treatment  there  is  always  danger  of  its  being
confounded  with  common  colic,  which  is,  as  a  rule,  not  fatal.  The  diseases
can   be   distinguished   from   each   other   as   follows:
Colic  comes  on  quickly  and  is  relieved  by  rubbing  the  stomach — the
pain  is  more  intense  and  spasmodic.
Enteritis  comes  on  more  slowly  with  greater  general  depression,  the
pain  is  continuous  and  is  increased  by  rubbing  the  stomach.
Causes. — The  common  cause  of  inflammation  of  the  small  intestines
is  the  feeding  of  an  improper  diet,  the  indigestible  substances  setting  up
an  irritation  that  inflames  the  delicate  lining  of  the  bowels.  Cold,  ex-
posure, wet,  blows,  kicks,  or  anything  that  will  injure  the  small  intestines.
The  parts  affected  in  this  disease  are  also  causes.  This  disease  is  also  a
common  complication  of  distemper.
Symptoms. — This  disease  is  always  ushered  in  by  feverishness,  the
eyes  are  red  and  swollen,  nose  hot  and  dry,  mouth  sticky,  the  belly  is  hard,
tense  and  hot  to  the  touch,  the  patient  has  frequent  shivering  fits,  and  the
countenance  is  most  expressive  of  pain  and  anxiety.  The  animal  will  steal
away  into  some  corner  and  stretch  itself  out  on  the  floor  so  as  to  bring
the  belly  next  to  the  cool  floor  or  ground,  and  in  this  way  may  be  relieved,