and  feed  him  sparingly.  Give  him  five  (5)  grains  of  saccharated  pepsin
before  meals,  and  five  (5)  grains  each  of  subnitrate  of  bismuth  and  bi-
carbonate of  soda  after  meals.  For  small  dogs,  such  as  terriers,  black
and  tans,  Japanese  spaniels,  etc.,  the  dose  should   he  reduced  one-half,"
Inversion  of  the  Vagina — See  Uterus,  Inversion  of.
Influenza. — This  is  an  epidemic  resembling  common  cold,  but  more
severe  in  its  effects,  and  contagious.  The  causes  are  supposed  to  be  atmos-
pheric cold,  and  damp  weather  in  spring  and  autumn,  which  are  the  usual
seasons  of  its  appearance.  Influenza  is  not  to  be  dreaded  if  taken  in  hand
at  once,  but  if  once  the  system  becomes  run  down  or  the  various  symptoms
which  denote  the  disease  take  good  hold,  there  is  serious  trouble  ahead,  and
leads  to  complications  which  deplete  the  kennel.  Even  if  a  cure  is  affected
the  convalesence  is  long  and  subject  to  a  relapse  from  the  most  trivial  cause.
In  the  first  stage  the  symptoms  are  dullness  of  the  animal,  loss  of  appetite,
rigors  or  shivering  fits,  nose  hot,  then  cold,  increased  thirst.  Second  stage:
A  discharge  from  nose  and  eyes,  which  at  first  is  mucoid  and  watery,  but
it  soon  becomes  of  a  mattery  description;  the  breathing  becomes  acceler-
ated and  the  conjunctival  membrane  red  (this  is  the  lining  membrane  of
the  eyelid).  The  symptoms  in  these  first  stages  are  very  like  the  earlier
symptoms  of  distemper,  and  most  people  seeing  one  of  these  cases  for  the
first  time,  and  in  a  young  dog,  would  say  it  had  the  latter-named  disease.
The  discharge  is  not,  however,  of  the  purulent  offensive  character
that  denotes  distemper  and  the  disease  is  as  liable  to  attack  old  dogs  as
young  ones.  In  some  cases  the  eyes  are  seriously  affected,  the  cornea  be-
comes of  a  bluish  shade,  the  sight  is  affected,  and  in  some  cases  ulcers
form.  In  the  latter  case  use  Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion  No.  2,  two  or  three
times  daily.
Distemper  is  gradual  in  its  development,  but  in  influenza  the  dif-
ferent stages  develop  with  great  rapidity,  the  disease  running  in  some
cases  on  to  complications  in  twenty-four  hours.  If  the  complaint  is  not
checked  in  its  earlier  stages  one  or  both  of  the  after-mentioned  compli-
cations may  set  in.  These  complications  are  affections  of  the  lungs,  and
those  of  a  rheumatismal  character.  When  the  chest  complication  is  setting
in,  the  breathing  becomes  more  accelerated  and  painful,  the  fever  increases,
in  fact  the  symptoms  are  those  of  ordinary  chest  complaints;  and  these
may  be  bronchitis,  congestion  and  inflammation  of  the  lungs  or  pleurisy.
As  it  requires  the  skilled  practitioner  to  differentiate  one  class  of  chest
disease  from  another,  it  would  be  useless  to  attempt  to  explain  to  the
amateur  how  to  diagnose  this  for  himself.
The  dog  should  be  kept  in  dry  quarters  and  away  from  draughts.
The  treatment  should  be  similar  to  that  recommended  under  Cold.  The
dog  will,  however,  require  still  greater  care  exercised  in  keeping  him
warm  and  in  a  well-ventilated  place,  as  well  as  in  being  supported  with
easily-digested  food,  such  as  strong  broth,  beef  tea,  boiled  milk,  bread,  etc.
In  the  early  stages,  Hoffman's  anodyne  or  compound  spirit  of  sulphuric
ether,  given  in  milk  three  times  a  day,  is  generally  beneficial.  Dose  for
a  20  lb.  dog,  15  drops;  smaller  toy  dogs.  10  drops;  larger  dogs,  20  drops.
Any  discharge  from  the  nose  should  be  encouraged  by  warm  fomentations
and  making  the  dog  inhale  the  vapor  from  vinegar  of  squills  sprinkled  on  a
hot  wet  sponge  or  cloth.  If  the  throat  is  swollen  and  sore,  slightly  blister
with  vinegar  and  mustard,  but  do  not  apply  too  long.
Feed  on  nourishing  foods,   strong  broth,   boiled  milk  and  bovine.     A
few  drops  of  the  latter,  administered  frequently  in   milk,  is  very  strength-
ening.
In  convalescence  a  treatment  for  a  few  works  of  Eberhart's  Tonic
Pill,  (which  contain  no  arsenic  or  "dope")  will  be  of  great  benefit  in
building  the  dog  up.
Another   authority  advises   as    follows:
"The  dog  will,  however,  require  great  care  exercised  in  keeping  him
warm  and  in  a  well-ventilated  place,  as  well  as  in  being,  supported  with
easily-digested  food,  such  as  strong  broth,  beef  tea,,  boiled  milk,  bread,
etc.  In  the  early  stages  compound  spirit  of  sulphuric  ether,  given  in  milk
+  hree  times  a  day,  is  generally  beneficial.  Dose  for  a  twenty  pound  dog,  15
drops;  Any  discharge  from  the  nose  should  be  encouraged  by  warm  fomen-
tations and  making  the  dog  inhale  the  vapor  from  vinegar  or  squills  sprink-
led on  a  hot,  wet  sponge  or  cloth.  If  the  throat  is  swollen  and  sore,  slightly
blister  with  vinegar  and  mustard.  In  convalescence  give  cod  liver  oil  and
syrup  of  iodide  of  iron,"  or  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills  instead  of  the  cod  liver
oil  and  iron,  are  just  the  thing  to  use  here.
The  following  is  also  good  advice  on  Influenza:
Symptoms:  The  disease  is  commonly  located  in  the  mucous  mem-
brane of  the  nose,  the  lungs  and  air  passages.  The  first  symptoms  are
those  of  a  common  cold  chill,  lassitude,  shivering,  sneezing  and  loss  of
appetite.  The  small  veins  of  the  eye  and  membranes  are  injected  and
there  is  a  profuse  discharge  "of  tears,  as  well  as  a  swelling  of  the  nasal
membranes.  The  throat  becomes  sore  and  there  is  a  dry,  hoarse  cough
that  is  sometimes  so  severe  as  to  terminate  in  attempts  to  vomit.  Breath-
ing is  hurried  and  painful  and  prostration  is  well  marked.  The  patient  is
dull  and  sleepy,  and,  when  forced  to  move  acts  stiff,  sore  and  lame.  There
is  more  or  less  fever  of  an  intermittent  type  and  the  animal  suffers  from
excessive  thirst.  The  pulse  is  irregular  and  usually  is  full  and  soft.  Diges-
tion is  disturbed  and  the  bowels  are  generally  too  loose,  although  in  some
cases  constipated.      Expectoration   is  scanty,   but   frequently  attempted.
Treatment:  Keep  the  patient  warm  and  in  a  room  that  is  well  venti-
lated and  free  from  draughts.  Allow  plenty  of  cold  water  to  drink  and  feed
anything  the  patient  will  eat.  Broths  of  mutton,  beef  or  milk  are  good,
as  well  as  raw,  loan  beef,  chopped  fine;  egg  noggs.  raw  eggs,  gelatine,  etc,
If  the  temperature  is  high  and  continues  so.  give  quinine  in  two-grain
doses  every  four  hours  until  it  is  reduced.  If  the  bowels  are  constipated,
loosen  them  by  doses  of  olive  oil,  a  tablespoonful  to  a  dose.  If  the  throat
is  badly  congested  and  breathing  is  difficult,  it  should  be  rubbed  with
some  camphorated  oil,  or  hot  applications  applied,  and  then  bandaged  with
soft  flannel.
The  following  prescription  is  highly  recommended:  Ammonia  mur.
and  ext.  of  glycyrrhizae  pulv.,  of  each  two  drams;   aquae,  three  ounces.
Give  one  teaspoonful  in  water,  every  three  hours.
It  is  important  that  the  animal's  strength  be  kept  up  and  cod  liver
oil  should  be  given  in  tablespoonful  doses  four  times  a  day,  as  well  as  the
syrup  of  iodide  of  iron.
The  doses  given  are  for  medium  sized  dogs,  use  judgment  if  for
small  dogs.
IrLs,   Inflammation  or. — See  Iritis.
Injury  to  the  Brain — The  bony  covering  of  the  brain  is  very  strong  in
the  dog.  They  are  liable  to  accidents  from  falls  on  the  head,  running  full
force  against  some  obstacle,  or  from  a  blow,  which  may  cause  concussion
of  the  brain.  The  dog  will  lie  stunned  or  insensible,  breathing  feebly,  and
pulse  small  and  quick.  In  treating,  examine  the  head  for  fracture  of  the
skull,  and,  if  bleeding,  stop  it  by  cold  applications.  In  cases  of  this  kind
consult  a  good  veterinary  surgeon.  Until  he  comes  rub  brandy  or  whisky
on  the  gums  and  keep  the  body  warm.  If  you  have  on  hand  ammonia  hold
it  to  the  nostrils.
Intussusception. — See  Bowels,  Obstruction  of. — This  is  a  slipping  of
one  portion  of  the  intestines  that  has  been  contracted  by  spasm,  within
another  part  retaining  its  natural  diameter,  and  is  another  and  not  uncom-
mon cause  of  obstruction,  and  apt  to  occur  during  spasmodic  colic.  It  is
fatal,  and  can  not  be  determined  by  symptoms,  a  postmortem  only  showing
the  trouble.  No  dog  should  be  allowed  to  be  costive  over  two  days,  and
not  so  long,  is  much  safer,  without  having  been  helped  by  proper  remedies
prescribed  elsewhere.  It  is  always  safe,  however,  and  advisable  to  give  in
such  cases  a  full  dose  of  castor  oil,  olive  oil  or  a  mixture  of  both.  Worms
can  cause  obstruction  in  the  intestines,  especially  in  puppies,  round  worms
getting  coiled  up  into  balls,  which  sets  up  local  irritation,  interfering  with
the  natural   action   of  the  bowels.
Jaundice,  or  the  "Yellows,"  and  Inflammation  of  (he  Liver  (Hepatitis).
— These  should  be  treated  as  distinct  diseases,  but  to  the  ordinary  dog
owner  the  division  would  be  of  little  use.  the  causes  and  general  treatment
being  alike.  There  are  two  forms  of  inflammation  of  the  liver — the  acute
and  chronic,  the  former  the  rarer,  which  appears  more  suddenly;  the  latter
comes  as  a  sequel  of  the  acute.  The  causes  of  this  disease,  in  most  cases,
are  traceable  to  improper  and  over-feeding,  combined  with  lack  of  exercise,
which  accounts  for  the  great  number  of  such  cases  occurring  in  house  and
pet  dogs.  In  hunting  dogs  it  can  be  brought  on  by  continued  exposure  to
wet,  or  their  going  into  water  in  cold  weather,  sleeping  in  damp  places,
of  over-exertion.
One  very  common  cause  is  the  repeated  resort  to  powerful  emetics,
which  so  many  use  as  if  they  possessed  a  charm  over  dog  diseases.
Symptoms. — Dog  is  dull,  restless  in  his  sleep,  has  excessive  thirst,  very
poor  appetite,  becomes  thin,  and  the  portions  of  his  skin  not  covered  by
hair  you  will  readily  notice  to  be  of  a  yellowish  color  or  tinge.  This  will
be  seen  on  the  gums,  lips,  and  under  the  legs.  The  discharge  is  fetid,  and
urine,  passed  in  small  quantities,  is  yellow.  There  is  also  fever,  with  fits
of  heat  and  shivering.  Vomiting  sometimes  occurs;  the  matter  ejected
is  slimy  and  of  a  yellowish  color;  the  bowels  are  generally  constipated,
and  the  excrement  of  a  pale  clay  color.  In  chronic  cases  the  belly  is  often
enlarged  and  flatulence  often  exists.  In  severe  cases  the  dog  will  los«
flesh  rapidly,  and  soon  become  a  mere  skeleton.  The  liver,  in  a  healthy
state,  secretes  a  yellow  fluid  called  the  gall,  which  is  collected  in  the  gall
bladder,  intended  to  mix  with  the  chyle,  completing  digestion.  When  ob-
struction of  the  gall  bladder  takes  place  the  gall  is  diverted  from  its
natural  purpose,  is  reabsorbed  by  the  blood  vessels,  enters  the  general
system,  giving  a  bright  saffron  color  to  the  eyes,  lips,  inside  of  the  ears,
arms  and  thighs,  sometimes  to  the  whole  skin,  and  from  this  it  is  often
called  the  "Yellows."
Jaundice  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  often  exists  as  a  sequel  to  distem-
per, and  when  this  is  the  case  is  most  difficult  to  manage  on  account  of
the  already  reduced  strength  of  the  patient.  Treatment  must  to  some
extent  be  governed  by  circumstances  of  each  case.
The  invariable  yellow  color  of  the  parts  mentioned  as  a  symptom  in
this  disease  is  one  which  the  least  careful  observer  cannot  fail  to  notice;
but  before  this  occurs  there  are  other  symptoms  which  should  not  be
overlooked.  In  the  earlier  stages  the  dog's  appetite  fails;  he  suffers  con-
siderable thirst  which  increases  as  the  disease  progreses;  there  is  fever,
with  alternate  fits  of  heat  and  shivering;  vomiting  may  occur,  and  the
matter  ejected  is  generally  slimy  and  of  a  yellowish  color;  the  urine  is
passed  in  small  quantities,  and  is  a  deep  yellow  color;  the  bowels  are
generally  constipated,  and  the  excrement  is  of  a  pale  clay  color.  In  chronic
cases  the  belly  is  enlarged,  and  flatulence  often  exists;  while  on  the  right
side  a  swelling  may  be  felt.  In  severe  cases  the  dog  rapidly  loss  flesh
and  soon  becomes  a  mere  skeleton;  the  coat  is  rough  and  staring,  and
often  somes  off  in  patches.  All  writers  I  have  consulted  on  the  subject
recommend  mercury  in  the  treatment  of  jaundice,  so  I  here  give  par-
ticulars of  its  dose,  and  the  mode  of  administering  it,  for  the  benefit  of
my  readers,  although  I  do  not  myself  use  it.
Mercurial  Treatment  of  Jaundice. — Calomel  2  grains  to  4  grains,  with
1  grain  of  opium  every  six  hours,  as  per  size  of  dog,  is  not  uncommon  pre-
scription. Or  another  treatment  is:  Blue  pill  3  grains,  opium  1  grain,
to  be  given  every  five  or  six  hours.  If  diarrhea  be  produced  by  this  treat-
ment, the  quantity  of  opium  must  be  increased,  and  the  mercury,  if  neces-
sary, reduced  to  2  grains.
I   prefer   to   use  the   Compound   Podophyllin   Pills:
Podophyllin     6  grains
Compound  extract  of  colocynth 30  grains
Powdered    rhubarb     48  grains
Extract  of  henbane    36  grains
Mix  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills.     One  pill  to  dog  up  to  20  lbs.,
two   pills   to   larger  ones.
If  the  bowels  be  not  freely  opened  after  administering  the  first  pill  a
close  of  salts  and  senna  (black  draught)  should  be  given;  on  the  other
hand,  if  diarrhea  exists  it  must  be  checked.  In  conjunction  with  the  pills
the  following  mixture  should  be  tried:
Mixture  for  Jaundice. — Take  bromide  of  potassium,  1  dram;  taraza-
cum  (dandelion)  juice,  3  ounces;  mix,  and  give  a  teaspoonful  three  times
a  day  in  water  or  gruel.     This  dose  is  for  a  dog  about  20   lb.  weight,  for
a  50  lb.  or  larger  dog  give  a  two  teaspoonful  dose.  Benefit  is  also  derived
from  the  administration  of  30  grains  to  60  grains  of  sulphate  of  potassium
in  water.  The  dose  may  be  repeated  in  twenty-four  hours,  but  must  not
be  continued  long  enough  to  cause  excessive  purging.
When,  as  in  chronic  inflammation,  the  liver  is  enlarged,  the  Liniment
for  Sprains,  equal  parts  of  spirits  of  turpentine,  liquid  ammonia  (not  the
strongest),  laudanum  and  rape  oil,  well  rubbed  round  the  region  of  the
diseased  organ,  or  a  strong  mustard  plaster  applied.  Another  method  of
affording  relief  is  to  take  a  piece  of  flannel,  dip  it  in  hot  water,  wring  the
water  out,  pour  some  spirit  of  turpentine  over  the  material,  and  apply  to
the  affected  part.  It  is  very  important  that  the  bowels  should  be  freely
relieved  at  the  outset,  and  if  the  means  advised  above  prove  unsuccessful,
it  would  be  well  to  resort  to  clysters  of  oatmeal  gruel  and  castor  oil.  The
diet  is  very  important  throughout  the  attack.  Must  be  light  and  nourishing,
and  in  a  fluid  or  sloppy  form.  Boiled  wheat  flour,  with  beef  tea  or  mutton
broth,  is  very  good.     Keep  dog  warm,  dry,  and  disturbed  as  little  as  possible.
Kennel  Lameness,  or  Chest-Founder. —  (See  Rheumatism,  also.) — This
is  a  rheumatic  affection  of  the  forequarters,  and  particularly  of  the  muscles
connecting  the  shoulder-blade  with  the  trunk.  It  is  caused  by  exposure  to
wet  and  cold,  and  generally  by  the  dog  being  kept  in  damp  or  draughty
kennels.  The  symptoms  are  stiffness  and  soreness  of  one  or  both  shoul-
ders. This  is  most  noticeable  when  the.  dog  is  running  down  hill,  or  when
jumping,  as  of  course  then  practically  the  whole  of  the  weight  of  the  body
is  on  these  parts.  Left  to  himself,  the  dog  shows  an  indisposition  to  move,
and  experiences  pain  if  the  hand  is  passed  over  his  shoulders;  indeed,  even
when  a  attempt  is  made  to  touch  him,  he  shrinks  from  the  hand  with  a
snarl  or  anticipatory  cry  of  pain.  In  long-standing  cases  power  of  move-
ment of  the  forequarters  is  almost  lost,  and  many  are  incurable.
The  treatment  most  advised  is  to  give  a  warm  bath,  and  after  thor-
oughly drying,  rub  the  parts  well  with  a  liniment  composed  of  equal  parts
spirit  of  turpentine,  spirit  of  hartshorn,  and  laudanum.  If  that  should
fail  to  give  relief  the  following  should  be  tried:
Liniment  for  Rheumatism.— Take  liniment  of  aconite,  1  part;  com-
pound camphor  liniment,  2  parts;  mix,  and  rub  into  the  affected  parts  con-
tinuously for  half  an  hour  at  a  time,  using  considerable  friction.  The
rheumatic  liniment  is  expensive,  also  a  powerful  poison,  so  that  great  care
must  be  used  with  it.
The  dog's  coat  should  be  wiped  dry  after  applying  it,  and  it  is  advisable
that  he  should  wear  a  canvas-faced  muzzle.  The  bowels  should  be  freely
acted  on,  and  the  Compound  Podophyllin  Pills  (find  prescription  under
Asthma)  will  be  the  best  aperient.  This  pill  given  once  will  probably  be
enough.  A  little  warm  broth  after  given  will  assist  its  action.  The  fol-
lowing mixture  should  also  be  given:
Mixture  for  Rheumatism. — Take  iodide  of  potassium,  y2  dram;  sweet
spirit  of  nitre,  Y2  ounce;  water,  3%  ounces.  Give  one  to  two  dessert-
spoonfuls for  a  dose,  twice  a  day.
Even  more  useful  than  the  mixture  recommended,  is  salicylate  of
sodium   in    10   grain   to   30   grain   doses,   in   water,   three   times   a   day.      If
this  fail,  then  try   5  grains  to  15  grains  of  benzoic  acid  in  pill  form,  twice
a-day.
The  food  shoufd  be  sloppy  and  nourishing,  and  the  dog  be  kept  in  a
warm,  dry  place,  free  from  draught.
Kidneys,    Inflammation   of   the This    is    fortunately    not    often    found
in  the  dog.  It  is  a  disease  of  a  very  dangerous  nature.  The  symptoms  are
intense  fever,  great  pains  across  the  loins,  a  peculiar  straddling  gait  and  the
ineffectual  or  partial  effort  to  pass  urine,  the  quantity  being  small  and
sometimes  mixed  with  blood.  It  may  be  caused  by  the  presence  of  stone,
by  blows  or  sprains  in  the  lumbar  region,  or  due  as  a  result  of  having
administered  overdoses  of  turpentine,  cantharides,  or  other  powerful  exci-
tants of  the  urinary  organs.  It  is  safest  and  advisable  to  call  in  a  qualified
veterinarian  in  this  trouble.  Relief  can  be  given  by  continuous  bathing  of
the  surrounding  parts  with  warm  water,  relieving  the  bowels,  and  re-
ducing the  attendant  fever  by  daily  doses  of  (12  grains  for  an  ordinary  dog)
of  Dover's  Powder,  and  the  constant  use  of  the  following  fever  mixture:
Powdered    nitre    1        dram
Sweet  spirits  of  nitre    y2    ounce
Mindererous    spirit    ' 1  yz  ounce
Wine  or  antimony    1        dram
Water     4        ounces
Mix;  dose  for  a  20  lb.  to  40  lb.  dog,  one  tablespoonful  every  four
hours  in  a  little  gruel.  Larger  dogs  like  St.  Bernards  a  table-
spoonful  and  a  half  as  a  dose.
Keeping  Flies  Off  Ear  and  Nose. — Flies  often  bother  a  dog's  ear  and
nose  in  summer,  making  sore  places.  Pine  tar  rubbed  on  the  sore  places
will  do  this  nicely,  also  healing  up  the  sores  at  same  time.  You  can  get
a  box  of  it  at  any  drug  store  for  10  cents,  or  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure  applied
twice  daily  will  do  the  work  as  well.
Lice. — See  Parasites  External.
Lice. — There  are  two  kinds  of  lice  which  infest  dogs,  and  both  of
them  are  quite  similar  to  those  infesting  man.  One,  the  Haematopinus
piliferus,  is  generally  found  about  the  throat  and  back  of  the  ears,  but  may
extend  over  all  parts  of  the  body.  The  female  is  two  mm.  long,  in  color
a  yellowish  white,  the  head  being  a  little  darker  than  the  body.  The  male
is  1.15  mm.  long.  The  head  is  short  and  as  wide  as  it  is  long.  It  is  salient
and  is  exactly  applied  to  the  thorax.  The  third  and  fourth  articles  of  the
antennae  are  alike.  The  female  is  about  2  mm.  in  length.  The  abdomen
is  a  long  oval  in  shape  and  well  developed.  It  is  made  up  of  nine  round
segments,  the  first  seven  having  two  rows  of  short  bristles.  The  other
louse  (Trichodectes  latus)  is  a  bright  yellow,  with  dark  spots,  with  blackish
brown  bands  on  the  head.  The  female  in  length  is  1.5  mm.,  the  male  1.4
mm.     The  head  is  wider  than  it  is  long.     The  antennae  are  hairy  and  differ-
ent  In  both  sexes,  the  first  article  in  the  male  being  much  thicker  than
the  other.  The  abdomen  is  broad  and  more  rounded  in  the  female  than  in
the  male  and  has  lateral  but  no  median  spots.
Lice  live  in  all  parts  of  the  body — the  roots  of  the  ears,  around  the  eyes
and  all  about  the  head  and  face,  as  well  as  along  the  top  of  the  back.  They
spt  up  an  irritation  that  causes  the  dog  to  scratch  and  worry  continually,
and  if  the  skin  be  closely  examined  streaks  and  dots  of  blood  will  indicate
the  feeding  places  of  these  pests,  which  are  easily  discerned  creeping  about.
The  rapidity  with  which  lice  multiply  is  marvelous.  Independent  of
the  destructive  influences  which  restrain  their  multiplying,  it  is  estimated
that  the  descendants  in  the  third  generation  of  one  female  louse  will  num-
ber 125,000.  v
The  most  effectual  and  the  safest  remedy  for  the  destruction  of  lice
is  a  lime  and  sulphur  lotion.  The  skin  should  be  thoroughly  saturated
with  it  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  and  at  the  end  of  this  time  the  dog
should  be  given  a  bath  in  lukewarm  water,  a  standard  dog  soap  being