"Melanotic  Tumors  are  seldom  seen  in  canine  practice.  There  are  a
few  cases  on  record,  and  with  them  excision  has  been  successful.
"Osseous  Tumors  are  likewise  rare  in  dogs,  and  when  occurring,  are
invariably  associated  with  rickets;  their  situation  is  the  limbs.
"Lacteal  Tumors  have  already  been  fully  dealt  with  under  that  head-
ing."
Tongue,  Inflammation  of  (Glossitis). — Dogs  are  extremely  liable  to
Injuries  of  the  tongue,  which  is  not  surprising  when  we  consider  the  variety
of  articles  they  pick  up — sharp  pieces  of  bone  or  stone.  In  some  instances
the  inflammation  is  due  to  a  sting  (I  have  known  one  or  two  cases  of  this
in  terriers,  while  the  teeth  sometimes  cause  lacerations.
The  symptoms  are  first  an  increase  of  saliva,  the  jaws  are  moved  con-
stantly, and  upon  examination  the  tongue  is  found  to  be  inflamed  and  ten-
der, swallowing  is  performed  with  difficulty,  thirst  is  present,  or  at  least
the  animal  finds  relief  in  continually  lapping,  although  probably  not  much
!p  swallowed.     The  mouth  should  be  rinsed  out  frequently  throughout  the
day  with  a  solution  of  boracic  acid  (1  scr.  of  the  acid  to  G  oz.  of  water).
To  do  this,  hold  the  head  down  slightly,  pour  the  liquid  in  one  side,  and
allow  it  to  run  out  of  the  other.  If  a  little  is  swallowed,  it  is  of  no  con-
sequence. A  weak  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid  can  also  be  used  in  the  same
way  with  marked  benefit.  This  treatment,  with  an  aperient,  is  usually  all
that  is  necessary.  If  the  inflammation  is  due  to  injuries  caused  by  the
teeth,  the  latter  must  have  attention;  they  may  require  extraction.  The
food  must  consist  for  a  time  of  warm  milk  or  gravy.  Chicken  gravy  or
made  from  giblets,  with  flour  added,  is  very  nourishing,  and  many  dogs
that  are  sick  will  eat  this  when  refusing  everything  else.  Egg  and  milk  to
lap  may  also  suit  them,  and  it  is  good.
Tongue,  Paralysis  of. — Occasionally  seen  in  dogs,  and  often  congenital.
The  tongue  protrudes,  becomes  dry  and  often  cracks.  The  dog  experiences
little  inconvenience  and  laps  with  ease.  If  cracks  appear  on  the  tongue,
apply  a  little  boracic  acid  ointment,  which  is  non-poisonous,  while  a  little
sweet  oil  on  the  tongue  will  prevent  the  dryness.  A  nerve  tonic  should  be
given,  5  to  20  drops,  as  per  sized  dog,  of  the  tincture  of  Nux  Vomica,  with
Vz  grain  to  1  grain  of  quinine,  is  a  very  good  thing  to  use  now,  given  in
water  twice  daily  after  food.
Tongue,  Ulcers  on  the. — A  very  painful  condition,  usually  the  result  of
neglect,  the  teeth  having  been  allowed  to  accumulate  tartar.  The  ulcers
may  be  quite  rough  on  decayed  teeth,  or  to  a  disordered  stomach,  this  fre-
quently the  cause.  In  this  case  give  an  aperient,  give  a  plain  diet,  and  in
moderate  quantities,  and  when  the  condition  of  the  stomach  improves,  the
ulcers  disappear.  Remove  the  tartar  by  scaling,  and  rub  the  teeth  after-
wards with  a  tooth  brush  dipped  into  a  weak  solution  of  Condy's  Fuid.
Extract  the  decayed  teeth  if  any.  Touch  the  ulcers  lightly  with  nitrate
of  silver.
Ticks  resemble  in  appearance  a  spider,  to  which,  in  fact,  they  are  re-
lated, varying  in  size  from  a  pin's  head  to  a  small  pea.  The  tick  "fastens
in  the  skin  by  means  of  its  legs, holding  on  with  as  much  tenacity  as  fre-
quently to  part  in  two  in  the  attempt  to  remove  it.  They  are  less  common
and  less  known  than  either  the  flea  or  louse.  The  color  of  the  smaller  ones
is  a  light  grey,  but  become  dark  when  gorged  with  blood  from  the  dog.
My  Skin  Cure  will  also  destroy  these  pests,  but  you  must  rub  it  in  well
to  kill  them,  and  all  over  the  body.  In  using  it,  after  leaving  on  the  dog
for  fifteen  minutes,  you  can  then  rinse  off  and  dry  the  dog,  thus  getting
rid  of  the  greasy  condition  of  the  coat.  Ticks  occasionally  occur  even  in
the  best  regulated  kennels,  as  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  prevent  a  dog
sometimes  coming  in  contact  with  other  dogs  so  infected.  Once  ticks  make
their  appearance  lose  no  time  in  ridding  the  dog  of  them.
Warts  are  rather  common  on  the  dog,  occurring  on  the  lips,  ears,  in-
side of  the  mouth,  and  appear  singly  or  in  clusters.  They  can  be  removed
by  a  ligature  tied  tightly  around  the  root  as  close  to  the  skin  as  possible.
Another  method  is  by  ft  scalpel,  the  blade  held  fiat  on  the  skin  at  the  root
of  the  wart — cut  through — the  raw  surface  being  then  cauterized.  "The
hot  iron  or  actual  cautery,  although  for  the  time  the  most  painful,  is  after
all  (says  Dalziel)  the  best  and  safest."  Neither  potasse  fusse,  nitric  acid,  or
nitrate  of  silver  can  be  safely  used,  because  the  dog's  tongue  would  surely
sweep  the  injured  lip,  the  consequence  being  the  caustic  in  part  would  be
transferred  to  the  tongue,  which  would  peel  as  the  result.  If 'used,  the  jaws
must  be  so  tightly  bound  that  the  teeth  are  held  together,  so  the  tongue
cannot  protrude.
The  warts  often  grow  in  clusters,  and  the  difficulty  of  dealing  with
them  then  is  greatly  increased.  An  application  of  bicarbonate  of  soda  has
proved  effectual  in  some  cases.
NORMACOT    WHITE    KING,    the    "American    Major    Mite,"
Premiership  Winner  of  England.
Owner,   MELITA   KENNELS,    SEATTLE,   WASH.
Worming;  the  Tongue. — A  silly  idea  that  may  still  exist  in  some  isolated
nook  or  muddled  brain,  that  a  dog  has  a  worm  under  its  tongue,  the  re-
moval of  which  is  called  "worming,!'  and  which  is  supposed  by  idiots  to  do
great  good,  such  as  to  prevent  the  dog  from  biting,  should  he  ever  become
mad?  Operation  consisted  in  cutting  the  bridle  of  the  tongue  and  pulling
out  a  small  ligament,  which  contracts  and  curls  up  like  a  worm.  Anyone
so  ignorant  should  have  the  same  operation  performed  on  their  own  tongue,
to  see  how  cruel,  ridiculous  and  uncalled  for  is  such  an  idea.  Equally  as
silly  is  a  similar  operation  as  to  removing  a  worm  from  the  tail  of  a  dog.
Water  in  Chest. — See  Propsy.
MELIf  A  KENNELS
(REGISTERED)
914  WEST  CROCKETT  ST.,  SEATTLE,  WASHINGTON.
Western  Home  of  the  Pure  Maltese,  the  tiny  Snowdreams  of  Dogdom.
Championship,  imported  breeding  stock  from  finest  blood  of  England.
Owner  of  XORMACOT  CAMILLE,  only  brood  matron  daughter  in  America  of  MAJOR
MITE,  premiership  winner  of  England,  and  only  Maltese  whelping  six  puppies  to  a  litter.
Following  studs  at   service,  $50  each: —
CH.   IMPY,    the    only    English    and    Inter-
national  Champion   Maltese   in  America.
NORMACOT   WHITE  KING,  the  "Ameri-
can   Ma.'or    Mite."       Coat     measures     24
inches    from    tip   to   tip.
S.  NAMCR,  English  prize  winning  Mal-
tese and  son  of  Ch.  8'.  Snow   King.
MELITA  CUPID  (weight  4y2  lbs.),  big-
gest American,  prize  winner  on  Pacific
Coast.  Many  times  BEST  TOY  IN
SHOW.
MRS.  ANNA  R.  JVDD  and  some  of  her  famous  Maltese.
Wrenched  Back — Some  months  ago  a  party  wrote  me:  "My  dog  has
wrenched  his  back  (by  jumping  off  a  high  table),  about  six  inches  from
his  tail,  and  it  hurts  him  to  walk  up  the  steps.  He  gives  sharp  cries  of  pain
quite  often  and  holds  his  hindquarters  on  a  droop."
I  advised  as  follows,  and  the  dog  was  cured:  "Take  three  ordinary  cof-
fee cups  of  water,  add  one  coffee  cup  each  of  strong  vinegar  and  salt.
Heat  to  as  hot  as  you  can  just  stand  your  hand  in,  then  take  red  flannel
cloth,  dip  in  this,  wring  out  and  lay  over  parts,  repeating  as  cloth  gets  cold,
keeping  this  up  for  three  hours.  As  dog  gets  better  and  pain  leaves,  then
use  a  soap  liniment  or  a  chloroform  liniment  that  your  druggist  can  fur-
nish."
Worms — All  dogs  are  born  with  worms;  some  few  get  through  without
treatment,  like  some  children  do,  but  every  puppy  I  have  ever  bred  was
treated  for  worms  at  from  six  to  eight  weeks  old,  or  as  soon  as  they  were
weaned,  and  this  is  the  only  safe  and  sure  plan  to  follow,  for  you  make  no
mistake  by  so  doing.  Worms  are,  without  doubt,  the  cause  of  the  death  of
more  puppies,  in  various  ways,  than  from  all  other  diseases  combined,  de-
stroying life  when  their  presence  is  not  suspected.  Except  in  rare  cases,
they  do  not  do  much  damage  until  after  puppy  is  weaned,  when  they  get
their  work  in,  and  I  hardly  ever  treat  for  worms  under  six,  and  generally
not  until  they  are  eight  weeks  old,  or  just  after  being  weaned.  In  the  last
two  years,  however,  I  have  had  puppies  show  signs  and  pass  worms  in  con-
siderable quantities  as  young  as  three,  and  in  some  few  cases,  two  weeks
old,  and  I  have  then  treated  them  with  small  doses  of  vermifuge,  but  they
must  be  very  small  doses,  and  careful  in  what  you  use  at  this  age,  for  as  a
rule,  very  little  medicine  should  be  given  to  a  puppy  before  it  is  weaned.  To
be  safe  and  sure,  you  do  not  need  to  wait  for  the  usual  signs  of  worms  in
puppies,  but  just  make  up  your  mind  to  the  fact  that  all  pups  are  born  with
worms — and  you  won't  miss  it.  When  you  buy  a  puppy,  find  out  If  it  has
been  treated;  if  not,  do  so  at  once,  for  you  can  be  sure  it  has  them,  and
proper  remedies  are  now  made  that  are  perfectly  safe  to  use,  and  harmless
should  puppy  not  have  any  worms.
There  are  several  worm  remedies  made  for  dogs  that  are  safe  and  re-
liable. When  I  have  to  give  puppies  treatment  for  worms  before  they  are
weaned,  I  have  used  Clayton's  Vermifuge  in  small  doses,  and  with  good
success,  (see  what  he  says  in  his  ad.  as  to  this),  and  also  "Vermilax,"  (see
Vermilax  Co.'s  ad.  also).  Both  this  and  Clayton's  are  in  liquid  form,  and
can  graduate  the  dose  easily.  As  some  remedies  are  put  up  in  capsules
that  would  be  too  heavy  a  dose  for  puppies,  and  even  older  small  toy
dogs.  An  overdose  might  not  kill  the  dog,  but  would  of  course  make  it
sick.  I  also  use  "Sergeant's  Sure  Shot,"  and  have  for  years,  as  it  was  got-
ten up  by  my  old  friend,  Polk  Miller.  It  is  put  up  in  liquid  form,  also  in
capsules.  In  the  liquid  form  you  can  give  small  doses,  using  judgement
as  to  age  and  breed.  I,  also  used  for  a  long  time,  Glover's  Vermifuge,
and  it  is  an  old  and  reliable  remedy,  all  right  for  grown  dogs  and  larger
breeds,  but  a  little  too  strong  for  puppies  and  toy  dogs,  unless  in  small  doses.
There  are  several  remedies  advertised  as  quick  workers,  some  claiming
"thirty  and  sixty  minute  results",  and  I  am  afraid  this  Is  too  quick  to  be
safe  as  they  may  contain  Areca  Nut,  a  dangerous  drug  to  ever  use,  as  it
shoots  through  the  dog  like  lightning,  but,  if  any  of  it  remains  in  the  dog,
it  means  inflamation  of  the  intestines,  and  most  always  a  dead  dog.  It  is
a  very  old  remedy,  too  old,  used  in  years  gone  by  when  they  did  not  know
so  much  as  we  do  now.  In  my  article  against  Tape  Worms,  I  warned  against
the  use  of  Areca  Nut.
Better  give  too  small  a  dose,  than  an  over  dose,  of  any  Vermifuge,
and  give  it  oftener,  or,  as  long  as  you  see  signs  of  the  dog  having  worms.
The  three  principle  kinds  that  infest  dogs  are:
First — The  Common  Round  or  Stomach  Worm,  of  a  pale,  pink  or  flesh
color,  pointed  at  both  ends  and  from  two  to  six  inches  long;  in  appearance
very  much  like  the  common  earth  or  fish  worm;  this  kind  is  most  common
in  puppies.
Second — The  Tape  Worm,  which  is  made  up  of  flat  sections  joined  to-
gether, and  these  sections  being  from  a  quarter  to  an  inch  in  length,  and
in  color  nearly  white,  the  tail  being  the  largest  and  longest  section,  which
gradually  gets  smaller  and  shorter  toward  the  head  to  such  an  extent  that  it
looks  to  the  naked  eye  as  fine  as  a  thread.  Under  a  strong  glass  this  part
will  look  like  a  lot  of  very  small  beads  strung  on  a  fine  thread.  Here  is
where  to  look  for  the  head,  which  is  described  by  Stonehenge  as  follows:
"The  head  is  small,  and  generally  hemispherical,  broader  than  long,  and
often  as  truncated  anteriorly;  the  four  mouths,  or  oscula,  are  situated
on  the  anterior  surface,  and  surround  the  central  rostellum,  which  is  very
short,  terminated  by  a  minute  opical  papilla  and  surrounded  by  a  double
circle  of  small  recurved  hooks."  The  head  can  seldom  be  seen  or  found
with  the  naked  eye.  It  is  larger  than  the  neck  but  yet  too  small  to  be
seen  unless  under  a  glass.
Third — The  Maw  Worm  (or  pin,  or  thread  worm,  as  it  is  variously
called)  is  located  in  the  rectum  and  is  nearly  pink  in  color,  and  from  a
half  to  an  inch  long.  These  are  the  least  dangerous  of  all  worms,  but
cause  great  irritation.  They  are  passed  adhering  to  the  feces.  In  puppies
these  sometimes  cause  partial  paralysis  which  disappears  after  the  worms
are  passed.  Some  authors  claim  that  the  maw  worm  are  segments  of  the
tape  worm,  but  I  think  it  is  a  separate  species  altogether.  The  common
round  stomach  worms  which  inhabit  the  stomach  and  small  intestines  are
most  to  be  feared  of  all,  being  more  peculiar  to  puppies,  causing  irritation
of  the  stomach  and  intestines,  indigestion,  fits,  diarrhea,  and  obstruction
of  the  bowels.  Your  puppy  has  a  much  greater  chance  to  live  when  the
worms  are  gotten  rid  of,  as  their  presence  leads  to  so  many  dangerous
complications.
Fourth — Hook  Worms — these  you  will  find  treated  under  a  special
article  elsewhere.
Dalziel  says:  "The  varieties  of  worms  Infesting  dogs  are  very  num-
erous, far  more  so  than  dog  owners  in  general  have  the  slightest  idea  of,
but  some  varieties  fortunately  are  rare.  A  variety  has  been  found  in  the
eye,  another  in  the  nasal  sinuses,  where  it  causes  great  irritation;  the  cruel
Thread  Worm  finds  its  way  into  the  heart,  producing  a  most  painful  death;
Borne  are  found  in  the  blood,  the  liver  has  its  parasite,  so  have  the  kid-
ney* and  urethra."
As  has  been  the  custom  of  writers  and  owners  of  dogs  to  classify  them
under  the  headings  of  round-worm,  maw-worm  and  tape-worm,  I  have
in  this  article  done  the  same  ,as  these  are  the  kinds  that  mostly  concern
dog  owners.
Symptoms  of  Stomach  Worms  in  young  puppies  are  plain  to  be  seen;
they  pass  them,  also  vomit  them  up;  they  cause  Diarrhea,  and  you  will
find  mucus,  or  slime,  and  sometimes  blood  in  the  passage.  You  will  also
notice  a  distension  and  hardness  of  the  stomach  very  much  disproportion-
ate to  amount  of  food  they  have  eaten  and  you  may  notice  the  puppy  drag-
ging itself  on  its  stern  or  biting  at  its  tail.  In  older  dogs  most  of  these
same  symptoms  appear,  as  well  as  others  here  enumerated;  a  foul  breath,
nose  is  hot  and  dry,  hacking  cough,  fits,  vomiting  of  their  food  mixed  with
mucus,  rough  and  staring  coat,  indigeston,  disturbed  sleep,  colic,  pains'  and
emaciation.
The  question  is  often  asked  at  what  period  after  service  should  a
bitch  be  treated  for  worms,  or  rather  how  soon  before  whelping?  A  fort-
night or  three  weeks  is  about  the  limit  after  service,  but  they  have  been
treated  without  bad  result  within  three  weeks  of  whelping.
If  you  have  your  puppies  confined  in  a  yard  it  is  very  easy  to  watch
their  passages,  and  this  is  one  of  the  surest  ways  of  all;  then,  as  soon  as
you  see  mucus  or  worms  passed  you  know  they  have  them,  and  can  go  to
work  at  once  to  treat  them.  Now,  as  to  stomach  or  round  worms — if  they
appear  before  pups  are  weaned  in  such  quantities  that  you  deem  it  advis-
able or  safest  to  treat,  as  it  most  generally  is,  select  the  vermifuge  you
wish  to  use  and  then  be  guided  as  to  size  of  dose  and  age  of  puppy.
Now,  here,  on  this  most  important  subject  of  Worms,  I  want  to  say  all
the  good  I  can  for  the  sake  of  saving  the  puppies.  You  will  find  advertised
in  this  book  worm  remedies  made  by  Glover,  Clayton,  Polk  Miller,  and  the
Vermilax  Company  and  the  C.  S.  R.  Remedy  Co.  Look  them  up  in  the
very  interesting  and  valuable  lot  of  advertisements  you  will  find  in  this
book  (as  beneficial  and  important,  even  if  they  are  "advertisements,"  and
paid  for  to  insert),  as  in  using  these  already  prepared  vermifuges  you
cannot  go  amiss  if  their  directions,  and  what  I  say  as  to  administering  them,
is  followed.  I  have  used  every  one  of  them,  and  it  is  far  better  to  use
some  one  of  these  well  known  worm  .remedies  that  are  made  for  dogs  by
reliable  and  experienced  parties  in  treating  dogs,  than  to  take  chances  or
go  to  the  trouble  of  having  other  prescriptions  filled.  I  am  not  getting
paid  extra  to  recommend  anyone's  vermifuge,  for  I  would  not  do  so  unless
I  thought  and  believed  the  article  would  save  puppies — my  main  object
in  this  book  being  to  do  good  to  dogs.  I  could  give  you — as  most  dog
books  do  give — a  lot  of  prescriptions,  but  only  give  one,  so  that  in  case
you  do  not  happen  to  have  on  hand,  or  cannot  get  one  of  these  mentioned,
then  you  could  get  this  one  filled  and  use  till  you  could  order  one  of  the
others.  Right  here  I  want  to  say — never  use  areca  nut  for  worms  in  any
form,  or  any  vermifuge  that  contains  this  dangerous  drug  if  you  know
it,  for  while  it  expels  the  worms  by  the  "fast  train"  route,  it  also  kills
more  dogs  by  far  than  it  ever  saves.  Areca  nut  is  a  relic  of  a  past  decade
— avoid  its  use.
The  following  article  on  Symptoms  of  Worms,  was  published  in  Field
and  Fancy,  (I  think  written  by  F.  J.  Skinner),  and  certainly  worthy  of
space  in  this  book:
"What  are  the  symptoms  by  which  it  can  be  determined  that  a  dog
Is  suffering  from  worms?  As  regards  puppies,  the  symptoms  are  very
clear.
They  begin  to  get  thin,  and  they  have  an  appearance  that  can  best
be  described  by  the  not  very  euphonious  or  deiicate,  but  certainly  vivid,
description  of  'pot-bellied.'
This  means  that  the  round  worms  with  which  they  become  infested
develop  to  such  an  extent  as  to  give  them  a  hanging  appearance,  which
every  one  that  has  had  experience  in  raising  puppies  will  speedily  recognize
as  symptomatic  of  the  presence  of  worms.
The  puppies  become  very  voracious,  yet  do  not  seem  to  thrive,  and  in
a  majority  of  cases  they  have  fits,  and  unless  relief  be  given  very  soon
they  will  die  In  these  fits.
Another  symptom  is  diarrhoea,  which,  of  course,  is  due  to  the  irritated
condition  of  the  intestines.
The  administration  of  worm  medicine  in  any  shape  or  form,  how-
ever simple,  to  puppies  is  always  attended  with  no  small  amount  of  risk,
and  for  this  reason,  as  it  seems  to  us — that  the  effect  of  a  mild  dose  of
medicine  is  simple  to  stir  up  the  worms  when  a  puppy  is  badly  infested,
which    is    practically    as    bad    as    giving    an    overstrong    dose.
The  mild  dose  stirs  them  up  and  causes  a  fit,  when  the  overstrong  dose
may  have  what  is  practically  a  poisonous  effect.  Repeat  the  dose  in  a  mild-
er form  in  about  a  week,  and  then  it  will  be  safe  to  assume  that  the  puppy
has  been  cleared  entirely.  After  this  take  the  precaution  to  give  from  time
to  time  some  little  laxative  medicine.  In  this  way  you  can  effectively
prevent  the  development  of  worms  to  any  serious  extent,  and  so  there  will
not  be  any  further  need  for  the  stronger  vermifuges  which  are  required
when  a  puppy  is   badly   infested.
The  following  are  among  the  many  symptomatic  indications  of  worms:
The  Eyes. — Pupils  almost  constantly  dilated;  the  eyelids  nearly  closed,
as  though  aching,  which  is  aggravated  by  motion;  sensitive  to  light;  the
whites  of  eyes  red  and  in  jested;  patient  acts  as  though  sight  were  de-
fective, being  guarded  in  its  movements;  eyeballs  roll  about  in  distorted
fashion;    opacity  of  the  lens  and   amaurotic   conditions.
The  Nose. — Great  irritation,  evidenced  by  frequent  rubbing  on  the
ground  or  with  the  paws.  .
The  Tongue. — The  dorsum  centrally  coated  with  yellow  fur;  on  the
sides  appear  round  or  oval  spots  of  a  pink  or  deep  crimson  color,  occasion-
ally slightly  elevated  when  vomiting,  and  diarrhoea  are  present  accom-
paniments, and  spots  are  observed  through  the  coating  of  fur.
The  Mouth. — Dribbling  of  slimy  saliva,  especially  during  sleep;  breath
fetid  and  very  offensive;  frequent  grinding  of  the  teeth,  both  when  asleep
and   awake.
Cough. — Dry,   short   and    spasmodic.
Appetite. — Capricious,  depraved,  frequently  ravenous,  occasionally  in
abeyance.
Heart. — Palpitation;  violence  and  irregular  action;  sharp  pains,  indn