Pneumonia — See  Lungs,  Inflammation  of.  An  inflammation  of  the
substance  of  the  lungs  is  generally  the  result  of  exposure  to  cold  and  damp.
The  first  stage  of  the  disease  is  announced  with  shiverings,  followed  by
fever.  Sometimes,  in  the  worst  cases,  it  is  accompanied  by  pleurisy,  which
is  inflammation  of  what  is  called  the  lung-case,  and,  in  such  instances,  it
usually  proves  fatal.  In  fact,  whether  the  pneumonia  is  or  is  hot  accom-
panied by  pleurisy  there  is  always  some  risk  of  a  fatal  termination.
Pneumonia  admits  of  no  delay  in  management,  but  must  be  treated
al  once  i> v  giving  a  solution  of  acetate  of  ammonia  to  reduce  the  fever-—
GERMAN  SHEPHERD  DOGS
ELHVIEW  KENNELS
ELMHURST,  PA.
=  THE  HOME  OF  THE  CHAMPIONS  =
1NTERNATIONAL  CHAMPION  APPOLLO  VON  HUNENSTEIN  P.H.
We  can  supply  dogs  of  all  ages  for  show,  pets  or  work.
The  greatest  selection  of  stud  dogs  in  this  country.
AT  STl  1>.
International  Champion  Apollo  von  Hunenstein,   Champion  Austria.
1913,  Belgium  1913,  French  1914.
Champion  of  record  in  America FEE  $50.00
Champion   Nero   Affolter    FEE    $50.00
For  further  information  write
512  SCRANTON  LIFE  BLDG.,   SCRANTON,  PA.
castor  oil  having  first  been  given  in  a  liberal  dose.  The  dose  of  the  so-
lution of  acetate  of  ammonia  for  a  matured  dog  (one  over  a  year  old)
would  be  for  a  fox  terrier  or  an  English  setter,  a  teaspoonful  every  three
or  four  hours  until  fever  is  subdued.  Larger  dogs  like  a  St.  Bernard,
greyhound  or  a  Great  Dane,  a  teaspoon  and  a  half  could  be  given.  If
the  malady  is  not  checked  at  this  stage,  it  quickly  passes  on  into  a  second
stage,  when  hepatization  takes  place.  The  cough  now  is  frequent  and
accompanied  by  expectoration,  and  respiration  is  performed  with  great
effort  and  pain,  and  the  general  expression  is  haggard  and  pitiful  in  the
extreme.  '  "When  it  has  reached  this  stage  a  warm  poultice  of  linseed
meal  should  be  placed  in  the  region  of  the  lungs,  and  be  renewed  several
times,  care  being  taken  that  after  the  first  poultice  a  piece  of  flannel  is
bound  over  the  spot,  lest  the  patient  should  take  a  fresh  chill.
After  the  fever  has  subsided,  tonic  treatment  will  be  necessary,  and
for  this  there  is  nothing  better  than  quinine,  the  dose  of  which  would  be
about  two  grains  every  three  hours  for  setters  and  pointers,  and  more  in
proportion  for  larger  dogs.  For  toy  or  smaller  dogs  one  grain  is  enough.
Solid  food  must  be  entirely  withheld  until  the  patient  has  quite  recovered;
he  must  be  dieted  on  such  things  as  beef  tea,  milk,  broth,  etc.  Finally,  the
cure  will  have  to  be  made  complete  by  a  course  of  some  good  tonic  pill,
in  which  iron  is  one  of  the  ingredients.  Clayton's,  or  Sergeant's,  or  Dent's
Condition  Pills  are  good  to  use  now.  I  can  furnish  either  by  return  mail
if  you  cannot  find  them  in  your  own  town.
Peritonitis. — See  Bowels,  Inflammation  of.
Penis,  Discharge  from  (Balanitis).— A  great  many  dogs  suffer  from  an
inflammation  and  excited  state  of  the  organs  of  generation,  having  frequent
partial  erections,  with  a  discharge  of  a  thick  yellowish  matter,  very  loath-
some if  in  a  house  dog.  Treatment  consists  in  bathing  the  parts  frequently
with  cold  water,  giving  quite  a  strong  dose  of  ordinary  black  draught  and
the  following  medicine:
Bicarbonate  of  soda 2        drams
Bicarbonate  of  potash    2        drams
Tincture   of  henbane    3        drams
Mindererous    spirit    1  y2    ounce
Water    to    make    6        ounces
Dose  for  a  toy  dog  up  to  20  lbs.  a  teaspoonful  four  or  five  times  a  day.
Larger  dogs  a  tablespoonful.  The  prepuce  should  also  be  syringed
with  weak  Condy's  Fluid  or  a  lotion  of  boracic  acid,  one  scruple
to  six  ounces  of  water.  Give  the  dog  barley  water  to  drink  and
very  little  meat.  Milk  and  broth  with  chopped  green  vegetables
(cooked)   would  be  most  suitable  in  such  cases.
Paralysis — Paralysis  is  due  to  pressure  or  injury  of  brain  or  to  spinal
cord.  If  one  side  of  the  brain  is  affected,  the  opposite  side  of  the  body
will  be  paralyzed;  but  if  the  whole  of  the  brain  is  implicated,  the  paralysis
will  be  general.  When  it  arises  from  injury  to  the  spine,  it  is  the  parts
behind  that  power  ,  that  are  affected.  Paralysis  often  follows  distemper;
the  hindquarters  suffer;  in  severe  cases  the  dog  losing  the  use  of  his  hind
legs,  dragging  them  along.  In  such  a  case  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  will
soon  shrivel,  and  a  cure  is  very  rare.  Chronic  constipation  also  produces
paralysis,  and  may  come,  as  the  result  of  general  debility  and  old  age.
Believers  in  dumb  rabies  say  that  paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw  renders  the
animal  incapable  of  biting.  Most  everyone  is  familiar  with  the  appearance
of  paralysis,  the  loss  of  muscular  power  and  constant  wasting  away  of  the
muscles  in  the  part  affected.  Paralysis  may  be  general,  but  is  in  most
cases  confined  to  one  set  of  muscles,  ranging  from  a  slight  tottering  gait  to
complete  loss  of  power  and  inability  to  walk.  Loss  of  power  and  wasting
of  the  hindquarter  may  also  be  caused  by  tapeworm.  So  long  as  the  dog
can  use  his  limbs  he  should  be  given  regular  gentle  exercise.  The  food
must  be  nourishing  and  rather  laxative.  Oatmeal  porridge  mixed  with  a
strong  beef  or  mutton  broth,  every  other  day,  will  generally  have  a  gentle
action  on  the  bowels,  with  a  meal  once  a  week  of  boiled  liver,  which  will
have  a  laxative  effect.
If  the  disease  is  connected  with  debility  the  strength  must  be  gotten
up  by  extra  food,  giving  more  than  usual  of  cooked  meat,  in  small  quan-
tities but  fed  oftener  than  usual.  The  medicines  in  paralysis  are  tonics,  and
strychnine — the  active  principle  of  nux  vomica — which  has  a  special  power
over  the  muscles  and  nerves.  One  to  three  grains  of  powdered  nux  vomica,
according  to  size  and  age  of  the  dog,  or  from  one-twentieth  to  of?e-six-
teenth  of  a  grain  of  strychnine,  with  two  to  six  grains  of  extract  of  gen-
tian, and  one  or  two  grains  of  quinine  made  into  a  pill.  Great  care  must
be  used  in  compounding  the  pills,  containing  as  they  do  such  a  powerful
drug  as  strychnine.  Give  a  pill  twice  a  day.  In  mild  cases  of  paralysis,
syrup  of  the  phosphates,  with  strychnia  (called  Easten's  syrup),  is  often
of  great  service.  In  lieu  of  the  latter  tonics,  a  handier  thing  to  do  is  to
use  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills,  which  contain  strychnine  and  other  good
tonic  properties.  In  paralysis  of  the  hind  legs  the  bladder  generally  par-
ticipates, the  dog  being  unable  to  stand,  and  cannot  pass  the  urine  freely.
Use  the  catheter  in  such  cases  night  and  morning,  or  the  dog  held  up  and
pressure  applied  to  each  side  in  the  region  of  the  bladder  to  expel  its  con-
tents. As  a  preventive  of  bed  sores  and  congestion  of  one  lung  turn  the
dog  over  occasionally.
Here  is  a  case  that  was  prescribed  for  by  Dent:
"Please  prescribe  for  my  English  setter  dog,  eight  months  old.  Last
November  I  hunted  him  through  the  month,  in  December  he  lost  the  use
of  his  hindlegs,  and  in  January  seemed  to  lose  the  use"  of  all  four  legs;
appetite  was  good  at  all  times,  eyes  were  bright,  nose  cold,  seemed  in
perfect  health  except  in  his  legs.  I  doctored  him  a  while  for  rheumatism
but  stopped  about  four  weeks  ago,  and  about  one  week  ago  he  seemed
to  get  a  little  better.  Can  now  use  his  front  legs,  can  manage  to  sit  up
and  draw  himself  around  with  a  half  limp,  the  back  legs  being  useless  now.
Will  he  get  well  and  is  it  rheumatism  or  is  he  paralyzed?  Ans. — Give  a
teaspoonful  of  the  syrup  of  hypophosphites  three  times  a  day,  also  give
one-half  grain  of  nux  vomica  twice  a  day.     It  is  paralysis."
The  following  ia  a  case  of  Partial  Paralysis,  or  congestion  of  the  spina*
cord,  prescribed  for  by  Dent.     You  might  have  a  similar  case,  so  I  give  it:
"My  pointer  dog,  three  years  old,  weight  forty-rive  puunds,  was  taken
sick  last  November  in  the  field,  let  down  in  the  back,  has  since  grown  worse,
will  now  lie  around  and  at  times  cry  from  pain;  he  will  crawl  around  on
his  front  feet  and  drag  his  hindquarters  when  first  taken  out  of  the
kennel,  then  will  gradually  get  up  on  his  hind  feet  and  down  on  his  fore-
feet, walking  behind  and  crawling  in  front,  and  in  a  few  moments  will
get  up  on  all  four  feet,  but  walks  very  stiffly  and  only  remains  up  for  a
short  time  until  he  goes  down.  Please  name  disease  and  treatment.  Ans.
— Give  your  dog  one-half  grain  of  nux  vomica,  five  drops  of  Fowler's  Solu-
tion of  Arsenic  and  a  tablespoonful  of  Fellows'  Syrup  of  the  Hypophos-
phites  of  Soda  three  times  a  day.  The  disease  is  a  partial  congestion  of
the   spinal   cord."
Paralysis  in  Bitches  Before  Parturition. — The  following  case  is,  I  am
glad  to  say,  not  common.  Mr.  Caswell,  of  England,  furnishes  this  exper-
ience, and  I  insert  it  as  he  gives  it,  as  it  may  be  beneficial  in  similar  cases,
should  they  occur.  It  is  probable  that  the  extreme  hot  weather  con-
tributed to  the  development  of  the  disease.  The  treatment  was  about  the
best,  and  all  that  could  have  been  done:
"Within  the  past  month  I  have  had  three  beagle  bitches  taken  sick
shortly*  before  whelping,  all  exhibiting  the  same  symptoms,  viz.,  paralysis
of  the  hindquarters  and  great  labor  in"  breathing;  for  this  I  gave  stimu-
lants (whisky)  and  rubbed  the  loins  with  mustard,  also  continued  massage
of  the  belly  and  loins.  In  the  first  case  labor  pains  came  on  and  the  bitch
had  one  pup,  after  which  paralysis  set  in  again  and  the  remaining  two
pups  were  removed  with  the  forceps  with  great  trouble.  The  bitch  died.
Postmortem  appearances  showed  that  septicemia  had  set  in.  In  the  second
case,  after  exactly  similar  symptoms,  massage  was  again  tried,  and  even
though  the  bitch  seemed  very  far  gone,  she  revived.  The  best  obtainable
veterinary  surgeon  was  in  attandance,  and  decided  to  wait  awhile  before
performing  a  Caesarian  operation.  Stimulants  revived  the  bitch  once  more
and  she  had  five  healthy  pups,  and  is  nursing  them  now  very  well.  The
third  case  started  with  paralysis  and  the  bitch  revived  two  or  three  times
under  treatment  as  before,  then  died  without  pupping.  Postmortem  re-
vealed three  pups,  all  placed  rather  far  forward.  This  bitch  was  not
within  two  weeks  of  whelping  time.  She  showed  normal  appearance,  was
in  excellent  condition,  had  been  kept  in  a  large  run  and  given  exercise
daily,  as  were  the  others.
"This  is  the  first  time  I  have  seen  this  paralysis  in  ten  years  of
breeding.  The  last  two  bitches  had  reared  litters  all  right  before.  Can  you
tell  me  the  cause,  as  the  veterinarians  about  me  seem  unable  to  do  so?  Also
if  the  extremely  hot  weather  has  had  anytihng  to  do  with  it."
Piles. — This  occurs  -more  frequently  in  house  dogs  or  those  confined
too  closely  to  their  kennel,  being  an  enlarged  condition  of  the  hemorrhoidal
veini  at  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  presenting  an  enlarged,  swollen  and
Under  appearance,  which  gives  pain  when  touched,  ©r  when  the  dog  drags
DISHASaS  131
himself  along  the  ground.  Piles  are  internal  and  external,  .as  they  exist
within  or  without  the  muscle  that  contacts  the  orifice  of  the  anus.  The
disease  is  readily  ascertained  as  the  condition  of  the  parts  are  naturally
small,  firm  and  contracted.  Piles  are  produced  by  over-feeding  with  too
much  stimulating  food,  want  of  sufficient  and  healthful  exercise,  produc-
ing diseases  of  the  liver,  constipation  of  the  bowels,  consequent  straining  and
undue  distension  of  the  parts  in  the  act  of  fecation.  The  diet  in  a  cure
of  piles  should  be  laxatives,  very  little  meat,  but  a  portion  of  boiled  liver
may  be  allowed  with  broth  or  in  soups,  oatmeal  well  boiled  and  vegetables.
As  a  mild  aperient  a  little  milk  of  sulphur  shoud  be  given  in  milk  or  with
the  food.  Dose  would  be  a  heaped  up  teaspoonful  for  a  dog  of  20  lbs.,
larger  and  smaller  in  proportion.  Here  are  some  ointments,  either  of  which
can  be  used:
Ointments  for  Piles. — Mild  mersurial  ointment,  7  parts,  finely  powder-
ed camphor,  1  part,  well  mixed;  or  the  compound  gall  ointment  of  the
Pharmacopoeia  may  be  used.  Hazeline  is  also   very  beneficial.
In  bleeding  piles  the  following  injection  may  be  used:  Tincture  of  kra-
meria,  2  drams,  water  to  6  ounces.  Two  ounces  should  be  injected  twice
a  day;  while  in  all  cases  of  Piles  Va  dram  to  2  drams  of  tincture  of
krameria  in  water,  twice  a  day,  will  be  useful.
In  some  cases  of  piles  a  tumor  forms  near  the  orific  of  the  rectum;  it  is
at  first  red,  but  afterward  becomes  purple,  and  finally  discharges  a  thick
fetid  matter  with  blood.  It  forms  a  ragged  sore,  difficult  to  heal  from
movements  of  the  dog  in  the  natural  act,  and  from  dragging  himself  along
the  ground.  Similar  treatment  to  that  already  advised  should  be  given,
using  the  ointment  and  washing  with  the  following  lotion  alternately.
Wash  for  Tumor j — Goulard's  water,  %  pint;  laudanum,  %  ounce;
tincture  of  arnica,    %    ounce;   mixed.
Periostitis  (Inflammation  of  the  Periostem,  the  Membrane  Covering  of
the  Bone,  is  not  often  met  with  in  the  dog,  usually  arising  from  direct  in-
pries.  It  is  a  most  painful  disease,  the  membrane  becomes  greatly  inflam-
ed and  swollen,  separated  from  the  bone,  while  frequently  deposits  of  bone
the  result,  which  cause  lumps  that  are  unsightly.  The  symptoms  are  heat
and  swelling  of  the  skin  over  the  affected  parts,  great  pain  upon  manipu-
lation, feverishness  and  lameness  when  it  occurs  in  a  limb.  Quiet  is  very
essential.  Apply  hot  flannels  to  the  part,  or  in  severe  cases,  hot  linseed
poultices  will  be  better.  If  lumps  remain  after  the  swelling  has  left  the
part,  then  paint  these  with  tincture  of  iodine,  discontinuing  this  when  the
skin  becomes  sore.  I  prefer  to  apply  Iodin  Vasigin,  full  strength,  as  it  does
not  make  the  skin  sore,  and  can  be  rubbed  in  with  the  hand,  twice  daily.
Parturient  Apoplexy. — See  Milk  Fever.
Pleurisy — See  Inflammation  of  Lungs.
Pharyngitis  (Inflammation  of  the  Pharynx) — This  disease  frequently
affeats  dogs.  True  pharyngitis  is  usually  due  to  soma  foreign  body  lodg«d
in  the  pharynx,  although  it  has  been  caused  by  strong  drugs  given  with
the  object  of  curing  disease.  In  such  cases  the  stomach  suffers  also.  Symp-
toms are  a  dry,  irritating  cough  and  a  difficulty  in  swallowing  is  observed
later  on,  the  dog  showing  pain  in  swallowing;  a  contraction  of  the  muscles
of  the  throat  shown,  and  upon  manipulation  the  pain  is  plainly  shown.
Upon  opening  the  mouth  and  examining  the  throat  it  will  be  found  red  and
swollen,  and  unless  the  inflammation  is  checked  ulceration  of  the  throat
will  follow  quickly;  or  abscesses  form,  which  will  cause  a  discharge  through
the  nostrils.  v      t.  ,—_,.   ^t\m\^
Treatment. — Ascertain  the  cause  and  try  to  remove  it.  If  condition  is
clue  to  foreign  matter,  this  must  be  moved,  and  with  hot  linseed  poultice
(kept  in  position  by  a  bandage)  applied  to  the  neck.  Nothing  solid  must  be
given  to  eat,  feed  milk,  eggs  or  Bovine.  This  simple  treatment  will  gen-
erally effect  a  cure,  but  should  ulceration  occur,  then  paint  the  part  with
a  weak  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver — 2  grains  of  this  to  V2  ounce  of
distilled  water — night  and  morning  with  a  camel's  hair  brush.  If  ulcera-
tion is  severe  and  granulations  present,  touch  the  latter  with  "London
Paste,"  best  applied  on  the  point  of  a  probe,  around  which  is  rolled  a
piece  of  wool.  If  pharyngeal  abscesses  form  they  must  be  lanced  to  empty
contents.  The  dog  will  be  left  in  a  debilitated  state  when  the  acute  symp-
toms have  subsided,  due  to  the  general  constitutional  disturbance  accom-
panying the  disease.  A  tonic  should  now  be  given.  Clayton's  or  Dent's
Condition  Pills  will  be  just  the  thing  to  use  for  a  while.
Polypus. — A  tumor  growing  on  some  mucous  membrane,  the  nose,  or
the  vaginal  passage  being  attacked  by  a  stalk  or  pedicle,  varying  in  length
and  thickness.  The  tumor  is  smooth,  of  a  red  color,  shaped  like  a  pear
and  when  small  is  concealed  from  view,  but  protrudes  as  it  grows.  It
discharges  a  mucus  matter  often  tinged  with  blood  and  generally  offen-
sive in  smell.
The  treatment  is  simple,  consisting  in  the  removal  of  the  polypus  by
tieing  a  white  silk  thread  or  piece  of  fine  silver  wire  around  the  neck.
Tighten  this  daily  for  a  few  days,  until  the  neck  is  cut  through  and  the
tumor  drops  off.  Then  bathe  the  parts  freely  with  Goulard  Water.  If
fever  exists,  a  dose  of  cooling  medicine  will  suffice,  but  this  is  rarely  ever
necessary.
Prolapsus  Ani. — This  sometimes  occurs  in  pampered  house  dogs  that
are  old  and  too  fat,  and  from  insufficient  exercise  which  produces  constipa-
tion and  causes  straining.  The  protruding  part  should  be  cleansed,  pressed
back  into  place,  and  cold  douches  used  frequently.  Diet  should  be  laxative
and  exercise  must  be  given.  If  the  prolapsis  recurs,  a  stitch  of  two  can  be
inserted.     The  diet  must  then  consist  entirely  of  milk.
Prolapsus,  or  Falling,  of  the  Vagina  is  characterized  by  a  soft,  red
swelling,  and  generally  occurs  during,  or  immediately  after  the  period  of
heat.  It  must  be  carefully  washed  with  lukewarm  water  and  gently  re-
turned to  its  place.  The  following  injection  should  then  be  used  for  a  few
days,  and  one  of  the  powders  given  twice  a  day.
Injections  for  Prolapsus. — Tannic  acid  and  glycerine,  1  ounce;  water  to
THE  FAMOUS
Melbourne  English  Bulldogs
(THE  GREATEST  STRAIN  IN  AMERICA)
More    'Winners    Have   Been    Bred    in   These    Kennels    Than    Any    Kennel    in   the    U.    S.
AT  STUD — TWO  FAMOUS  INTERNATIONAL  WINNERS
MELBOURNE  K1LMAHEW
A.    K.    ('.    220903
(Imported)
FEE    $25.00
Sire  of  KILMAHEW — Kilbiirn  Regal;
dam — Lady  Laurel,  litter  sister  to  the
sire  of  Challenger,  England's  greatest
Bulldog.
KILMAHEW,  before  a  year  old,  wins
at  the  two  big  shows  in  Europe— Glas-
gow, Scotland,  and  London,  England,
four  firsts,  six  specials,  three  silver
eiips,  and  special  for  best  of  all  breeds.
MELBOURNE    DETERMINATION
A.    K.    C.    228045
(Imported)
FEE    $85.00
Sire  of  DETERMINATION  —  Index-
able;   dam — Inspiration.
DETERMINATION  wins  in  Europe
are — "The  25  Guinea  Cup,"  at  Birming-
ham; gold  medal,  Birmingham  Bulldog
Club;  lirst  at  West  Bromich  and  Dis-
trict Canine  Society;  Birmingham  and
Midland  Counties  Bulldog  Club;  Sutton,
Goldfleld  and  Dist ri<t  Canine  Society
Show;  .National  Dog  Show,  at  Birming-
ham, etc.
STUD  BOOK  MAILED  UPON   APPLICATION
ALL  BREEDS  BOARDED   AT  REASONABLE  RATES
MELBOURNE  KENNELS,  (registered)
(ESTABLISHED     1903)
Office  421  So.  Adams  St.  PEORI/\  ILL.
GUY  HORNISH,    Prop.
WWW  i   mil  ■■<
mak«  a  pint.  Or  tincture  of  krameria,  2  drams;  water  to  make  6  ounces.
Two  ounces  to  be  injected  night  and  morning  with  a  female  syringe.
Astringent  Powders  for  Prolapsus. — Take  gallic  acid  18  grains;  alum,
12  grains;  mix,  and  divide  into  six  equal  powders,  and  give  one  twice  a  day,
first  dissolving  them  in  hot  water,  but  allowing  them  to  cool  before  ad-