curial poisoning  are  increased  salivation,  gums  swollen  and  spongy,  that
bleed  at  the  slightest  touch,  surrounded  with  a  bluish  rim,  external  fetid
breath,  loose  teeth,  furred  tongue,  intense  thirst,  ulceration,  loss  of  oppe-
tite,  and  sloughing  off  of  the  gums.  If  the  dog  has  had  a  large  dose,  or
frequent  doses  have  accumulated  in  the  system,  the  stomach  and  intestines
have  become  involved,  causing  obstinate  vomiting  and  dysentery;  the
dog  loses  flesh  rapidly,  eruptions  occur,  the  hair  drops  off,  teeth  fall  out,
and  aparlysis  and  death  the  result.  Symptoms  must  be  treated  as  they
occur,  kidneys  and  bowels  operated  upon,  while  the  patient's  strength  must
be  kept  up  by  stimulants  and  food,  in  serious  cases  you  must  force  food
into  them — beef  tea  is  a  good  thing  and  most  eisily  given — a  little  at  a
tiine,  but  quite  often.
Surfiet. — See  Blotch  and   Eczema.
Scrofula. — Dogs  have  this  disease,  but  fortunately  not  very  often.  It
happens  oftener  in  young  dogs,  being  inherited,  or  due  to  in-breeding.
Symptoms  are  a  general  unhealthy  and  unthrifty  condition,  the  coat  having  a
rough,  dull  look  and  an  offensive  odor.  The  lymphatic  glands  swell,  eyes
have  a  chronic,  whitish  discharge,  appetite  irregular,  and  the  dog's  health
is  hardly  two  days  alike.  The  symptoms  become  chronic  as  the  dog  grow*
older,  and  the  abdomen  pendulous.  No  dog  having  scrofula  should  ever  bo
used  for  breeding.
Although  scrofula  can  not  be  cured,  to  keep  it  in  check,  strict  clean-
liness should  be  observed,  both  as  regards  the  dog  itself  and  its  habitation.
The  animal  should  be  groomed  daily,  as  this  tends  to  produce  a  healthier
action  of  the  skin,  have  plenty  of  exercise  and  fresh  air,  and  be  frequently
washed  with  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap,  and  Clayton's  Blood  Pills  be  used  for
a  course  of  treatment,  they  working  on  and  purifying  the  blood
Scrotal  Irritation, — This  is  met  with  in  dogs  used  constantly  for  stud
purposes.  The  scrotum  becomes  red,  spots  appear,  discharging  serum  and
irritation  is  severe.  The  part  finally  becomes  swollen,  very  sore,  the  dis-
charge drying  forms  scabs,  wh.ch  come  off,  leaving  sore  patches,  and  gran-
ulation is  very  likely  to  appear.  On  the  first  appearance  of  any  irritation
bathe  parts  with  warm  water  and  administer  a  mild  aperient.  After  you
have  well  dried  the  parts,  dress  morning  and  night  with  boracic  ointment,
and  put  muzzle  on  dog  to  prevent  his  licking  it  off.  If  granulations  exist
touch  with  nitrate  of  silver.  If  the  trouble  recurs,  as  it  often  does,  repeat
the  treatment.
St.  Vitus  Dance. — See  Chorea.
Sprains. — By  this  you  will  understand,  as  meant,  a  sudden,  violent
straining  of  a  tendon,  or  ligament,  caused  by  extreme  or  long-continued
exertion,  stepping  on  something,  or  by  getting  his  foot  into  &  hole  while  run-
ning, causing  a  twist  of  limb  or  body  from  the  natural  position.  Sudden
and  severe  pain  is  followed  by  inflammation.  You  can  discover  the  exact
seat  of  the  injury  by  passing  the  hand  over  the  back,  shoulder,  or  limb
which  seems  to  be  affected.  '  Rest  is  necessary  and  advisable  in  such  cases,
and  also  to  give  a  cooling  aperient,  such  as  the  "Mild  Purgative."
Syrup   of   buckthorn    3   parts
Syrup  of  white  poppies    1   part
Castor  oil    -    &   parts
Dose  for   15   lb.   to   20   lb.   dog   is  a   tablespoonful;    larger  dogs   two
tablespoonfuls  as  a  dose.     Shake  bottle  well
As  soon  as  possible  bathe  with  water  as  warm  as  the  dog  can  bear
it,  and  then  rub  the  part  with  Liniment  for  Sprains,  Bruises,  etc.,  at  least
three  times  a  day.
Stomach,  Inflammation  of  (Gastritis) — This  comes  from  a  number  of
causes;  irritants  accidentally  swallowed,  sometimes  by  mineral  or  other
poisons  carelessly  thrown  out  by  those  who  have  used  them  for  poisoning
rats.  The  use  of  areca  nut  of  turpentine  will  cause  inflammation.  The
dog  may  have  accidentally  swallowed  something  of  an  irritating  nature  while
helping  himself  from  the  garbage  barrel,  as  many  clogs  will  do.
The  Symptoms  are  excessive  thirst  and  violent  vomiting,  and  between
these  the  dog  will  lie  on  his  side,  stretched  out,  whining  and  moaning  from
the  pain  he  is  suffering.  When  this  is  observed  administer  from  Vi  grain
to   V2  grain  of  hydrochlorate  of  cocaine.
Treatment. — Keep  the  dog  undisturbed,  with  a  constant  supply  of  water
that  has  been  boiled,  within  reach,  and  give  him  mutton  broth  made  with
barley  and  a  little  isinglass  added  to  it.  To  allay  the  pain  a  very  little
opium  may  be  given.  Less  medicine  in  such  a  case  is  the  better  plan  to
follow.  If  diarrhea  should  follow,  which  is  very  likely,  this  must  be  treated
as  directed  under  that  head.
Sunstroke. — This  sometimes  happens  to  dogs,  the  same  as  to  people,
but  not  often,  and  generally  not  to  a  dog  rightly  cared  for  by  its  owner,
but  to  the  unfortunate  ones  who  have  no  owner,  the  poor  fellows  you  so
often  see — homeless  and  friendless — on  the  streets,  many  such  I  see,  and
while  they  lack  pedigree,  yet  they  are  dogs,  and  should  find  some  one
who  would  be  good  enough  to  give  them  a  home,  which  all  dogs  deserve.
I  have  now  in  my  kennel  one  dog — which  I  call  "Tramp" — that  I  found,
and  while  he  has  no  pedigree  and  I  could  not  even  tell  you  what  breed
he  is,  yet  "Tramp"  shows  me  every  day  by  his  actions,  his  intelligence,  and
his  so  plainly  show  of  affection  for  me — that,  while  he  is  not  worth  ten
cents,  yet  he  will  find  a  good  home,  and  just  as  good  treatment  as  the
finest  bulldog  or  pug  that  I  own,  and  just  as  long  as  he  lives,  unless  I  can
find  someone  to  whom  I  can  give  him,  and  who  will  treat  and  care  for  him
as  he  deserves.     If  you,  my  reader,  as  you  will — run  across  a  homeless  dog
— give  him  a  home,  even  if  you  could  not  tell  what  breed  he  is.  He  or  she
would  fully  repay  you  for  this  kind  act,  and  the  Good  Master  above  will
reward  you  for  it.  Every  dog  you  see  or  meet  deserves  all  of  this.  My
finally  dragging  his  hind  legs.  When  placed  upon  their  legs  they  drop
motto  is,  "You  can't  do  too  much  for  a  dog."  I  have  wandered  from  my
subject — Sunstroke.  Treat  it  as  you  would  a  person.  Remove  the  dog
quickly  to  some  retired  place,  as  cool  as  possible,  where  he  can  get  plenty
of  air,  and  apply  ice  to  the  head.  If  ice  is  not  obtainable,  cold  water
plentifully  applied  is  the  next  best  thing  to  do.     Also  give  a  little  whisky.
Spinal  Meningitis. — The  cause  of  this  disease  may  be  traced  to  injur-
ies to  the  spine,  violent  blows,  shocks,  falls  from  windows,  etc.
Occasionally  we  see  this  symptom  in  distemper.
The  symptoms  appear  slowly  or  quickly,  according  to  the  irritation
present.  If  the  spinal  cord  is  much  involved  by  the  exudation,  we  find
complete  paralysis,   posterior  to   that  portion   of  the  spine  affected.
Symptoms. — The  patient  is  heavy  and  dull,  with  a  staggering  gait,
sideways  on  their  hind  quarters.  If  the  paralysis  is  complete,  we  must  look
for  the  injury  in  the  cervical  region  (or  region  of  the  neck).  If  a  pin  be
used  to  the  paralyzed  members  there  is  usually  no  sensitiveness.  Coldness
is  another  symptom.  There  is  often  complete  paralysis  or  loss  of  power
to  control  the  urine,  and  there  is  a  difficulty  in  the  passage  of  faecal
matter.     The  paralyzed  members  become  atrophied  from  want  of  use.
Consciousness  is  not  at  all  impaired,  and  the  appetite  remains  fairly
good.
The  prognosis  is  usually  unfavorable,  and  when  recovery  does  take
place  it  is  very  slow.
Treatment  consists  in  counter-irritation  to  the  spine  as  biniodide  of
mercury  or  mustard  oil,  and  strychnine  in  increasing  doses,  commencing
with  1-50  grain  three  times  a  day,  increased  gradually  to  1-30.  Iodide  of
potash  may  be  used  in  conjunction  with  the  strychnine.  Electricity  may
be  tried.
Temperature  and  PuLse — As  indications  of  health  or  departure  from
the  normal  state  the  temperature  and  the  moisture  or  dryness  of  the  nose
— the  integument  forming  the  walls  of  the  nostrils — are  very  delicate  indi-
cators, but,  if  I  may  say  so,  they  tell  too  much,  and  are  too  general,  and
do  not  enable  us  to  discriminate.  When  the  nose  is  dry  and  hot  we  know
the  dog  is  out  of  sorts,  but  we  have  to  search  for  other  symptoms  to  deter-
mine what  is  the  matter.  The  pulse  and  general  temperature  are  impor-
tant aids  to  diagnosis  far  too  much  neglected.     Dalziel  says:
"The  first  thing  a  medical  man  does  when  he  visits  a  patient  is  to  feel
the  pulse,  and  if  there  is  a  suspicion  of  fever  of  any  kind,  the  temperature
of  the  body  is  carefully  taken;  this  course,  if  followed  with  the  dog,  would
assist  the  owner  in  treating  his  animal  in  all  inflammatory  and  febril  cases,
such  as  distemper.
"A  dog's  pulse  varies  from  90  to  100  beats  per  minute,  the  heart's
action  being  quicker  in  highly  bred,  nervous  dogs,  as,  for  instance,  setters,
pointers  and  bulldogs,  and  some  finely  bred  toys.     The  owner  should,  for
this  reason,  become  familiar  with  the  temperature  of  his  dog  in  health
so  that  he  may  be  able  to  at  once  detect  a  departure  from  the  normal
state.  You  can  feel  the  pulse  inside  the  knee,  but  in  small  doga  It  ia
better  to  count  the  heart  beats.  If  you  hold  the  left  fore-leg  up,  with
elbow  slightly  bent,  the  point  of  it  will  indicate  the  place  where  the  hand
should  be  held  flat  over  it.
"The  temperature  is  gauged  by  inserting  an  ordinary  clinical  ther-
mometer in  the  rectum  for  half  a  minute,  or  in  the  mouth  between  the
lip  and  teeth,  although  the  latter  can  only  be  done  on  a  quiet  subject.  The
temperature  of  the  dog  normally  varies  from  100  degrees  to  101  Fahren-
heit.
Tetanus. — See  Lockjaw.
Testicles,  Enlarged. — When  this  occurs,  acute  pain  Is  in  most  casea
present,  while  in  other  cases  it  seems  to  cause  but  little  if  any  inconven-
ience. Dogs  past  the  middle  age  are  usually  the  subjects,  and  obesity  pre-
disposes this  condition.  Dogs  which  have  not  been  allowed  to  be  bred  are
also  so  affected,  but  it  occurs  quite  often  in  stud  dogs  as  well,  also  due  to
injuries.  In  treating  such  cases  try  to  remove  the  cause  if  you  can  so
ascertain.  If  pain  is  present,  hot  fomentations  should  be  applied  and  an
aperient  given.
Thorns These  are  most  liable  to  pierce  the  pads  of  the  foot  (the  aole).
The  thorn  should  be  abstracted  at  once,  and  if  a  severe  case  of  inflamma-
tion has  been  caused  bathe  or  poultice  the  foot.
Tapeworm. — See  Worms.
Tartar  on  the  Teeth. — See  Teeth,  Decayed.
Tears. — See  Wounds.  1
Teeth. — The  following  article  on  teeth  could  not  be  made  plainer  than
by  what  Dalziel  says:
"The  dog  has,  when  the  set  is  complete,  or  in  kennel  parlance,  when
he  'has  a  full  mouth,'  forty-two  teeth,  made  up  of  twelve  inciaora,  or  cut-
ting teeth,  four  canines  or  fangs,  and  twenty-six  molars,  double,  or  grind-
ing teeth.
"Some  of  these  constitute  what  are  ordinarily  called  the  milk  teeth,
and  are  deciduous;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  after  a  few  niontha  cast,  and
give  place  to  permanent  ones.
"The  Incisors — six  above  and  six  below — form  the  front  teeth;  those
In  the  upper  jaw  are  the  larger,  and  both  above  and  below  the  center  teeth
are  the  smaller,  the  outer  or  corner  cutters  the  strongest;  these  appear
at  the  age  of  from  four  to  five  weeks,  and  give  place  to  the  permanent  In-
cisors at  three  to  four  months.
"The  Canines  or  Fangs  also  make  their  appearance  when  the  pup  is
from  four  to  six  weeks  old,  and  these  are  replaced  by  the  permanent  fangs
about  the  age  of  five  or  six  months;  they  are  considerably  elongated  and
pointed;   the  upper  ones  are  the  stronger.
"The  Molars. — Of  these,  twelve  are  in  the  upper  jaw  and  fourteen  in
the  lower;  the  first  (that  is,  of  course,  the  four,  two  upper  and  two  under)
are  not  deciduous,  and  make  their  appearance  at  about  three  or  four  months;
the  second,  third  in  the  upper,  and  fourth  in  the  lower,  are,  like  the  in-
cisors and  canines,  deciduous,  appearing  at  the  fourth  or  fifth  week,  and
giving  place  to  the  permanent  ones  at  five  to  six  months;  the  fourth  in  the
upper  jaw  is  much  the  strongest,  and  ,in  the  lower  jaw,  the  fifth  is  the
largest  and  strongest.  The  fifth  generally  appears  from  the  fourth  to  the
fifth  month,  and  in  the  lower  jaw  the  fifth  is  the  largest  and  strongest.  The
sixth  at  the  age  of  from  five  to  six  months,  and  the  seventh  in  the  lower  jaw
from  five  and  a  half  to  seven  months.  Most  of  the  molars,  in  the  lower  jaw
from  five  and  a  half  to  seven  months.  Most  of  the  molars,  whilst  adapted
for  grinding  or  crushing  bones,  etc.,  are  terminated  by  acute  lobes  suitable
for  tearing  flesh.
"Tartar  Accumulation  Upon  the  Teeth. — This  term  is  applied  to  those
blackish  incrustations  so  commonly  found  adhering  around  the  necks  of  the
teeth.  It  is  by  far  the  commonest  in  pet  dogs,  or  those  which  are  chiefly
fed  upon  soft  food.  Sometimes  the  accumulation  of  matter  is  so  great  that
it  causes  the  teeth  to  become  loose,  leads  to  ulceration  of  the  gums,  and
the  production  of  a  most  offensive  smell  from  the  mouth,  all  of  which  can
be  obviated  by  giving  the  animal  an  occasional  bone  to  pick.  The  treatment
must  be  directed  to  the  removal  of  the  tartar  deposit.  This  can  be  done  by
putting  on  a  simple  tape  muzzle  and  then  scraping  the  teeth  with  a  small
instrument  which  is  sold  by  most  cutlers  for  the  purpose  of  scraping  the
nails  of  the  human  subject.  It  is  a  somewhat  tedious  operation,  neverless
extremely  simple.
"Care  must  be  taken  to  prevent  the  gums  from  injury,  as  they  are  very
soft,  and  bleed  upon  the  slightest  touch,  in.  many  cases.  All  loose  and
decayed  teeth  should  be  pulled  out,  and  the  mouth  washed  occasionally  for
several  days  with  some  cleansing  fluid,  such  as:
Potash    alum     Vz    dram
Borax Vz    dram
Permanganate  of  potash 16        grains
Water    4        ounces
Directons. — Apply  to  the  teeth  with  a  brush.
"The  dog  must  have  an  occasional  aperient,  i.  e.,  a  laxative  of  a  mild
kind,  and  there  is  nothing  better  than  half  to  one  teaspoonful  of  liquid
extract  of  cascara  bark  in  a  little  water.
"Broken  Teeth. — The  teeth  are"  liable  to  injury  from  various  causes,
such  as  result  from  biting  hard  substances,  like  stone,  etc.  Unless  they
cause  inconvenience  through  sharp  projecting  points  lacerating  the  tongue,
etc.,  or  imperfect  mastication  of  food,  they  are  best  left  alone.  In  old  dogs
the  teeth  are  sometimes  worn  almost  away,  and  such  it  is  advisable  to  feed
on  soft  food.
"Displaced   Teeth, — The   permanent   teeth   may   be     displaced      either
through  a  temporary  tooth  not  having  been  shed,  or  by  an  excessive  ac-
cumulation of  tartar.  If  caused  by  the  former,  this  should  be  extracted;
the  latter  should  be  scaled  off  according  to  the  method  already  recom-
mended.    Tooth  forceps  can  be  had  at  surgical  instrument  makers.
"Caries,  or  Diseased  Teeth. — The  fangs  are  those  teeth  which  are  com'
monly  affected.  One  or  more  of  the  teeth  appear  brown,  with  a  black  center,
perhaps  coated  with  tartar,  and  loose.  The  breath  is  very  offensive,  and
saliva  is  constantly  dribbling  from  the  mouth;  sometimes  swellings  under
the  jaw.  The  sooner  the  decayed  tooth,  or  teeth,  is  removed,  the  better,
followed  by  a  gentle  laxative,  and  Vxe  adoption  of  such  methods  as  will
keep  the  system  in  good  working  order — viz.,  careful  dietary.
"Abscess  of  the  Jaw. — A  decayed  tooth  may  give  rise  to  the  formation
of  matter  below  the  jaw,  in  which  case  there  appears  a  soft  sort  of  tumor,
swelling.     If  this  is  neglected,  a  fistulous  ulcer  may  remain.
"In  some  cases  the  jaw-bone  itself  may  become  involved  in  the  dis-
easer  state,  but  fortunately  this  is  rare.  The  gums  are  red,  swollen  and
spongy.     The  breath  is  very  fetid  and  offensive.
"The  term,  'canker  of  the  mouth,'  has  been,  and  still  is,  applied  to  this
and  other  diseases  of  the  mouth.
"The  treatment  consists  of  removing  the  diseased  tooth,  fomenting  the
abscess  below  the  jaw  with  hot  water,  and,  when  ripe,  either  opening  it  with
a  sharp  knife,  lancet,  or  allowing  it  to  burst  itself.  After  the  matter  has
escaped,  it  should,  along  with  the  mouth,  be  washed  out  with  chloride  of
zinc,  or  lead  lotion,  four  grains  to  every  ounce  of  water.  The  system  will
require  good  support,  and,  it  may  be,  a  course  of  tonics,  such  as  a  grain  or
two  of  quinine,  night  and  morning,  in  the  form  of  a  pill;  or,  using  one  of
the  Condition  Pills  you  see  advertised  in  this  book — Clayton's,  Dent's,  or
Sergeant's — they  are  all  good,  made  by  dogmen  for  dogs,  and  you  won't  go
amiss  in  using  either  of  them  in  such  cases.
"Teeth,  Decayed. — It  is  unfortunately  only  too  true  that  the  condition
of  a  dog's  teeth  does  not  receive  the  attention  that  it  should;  this  is  very
evident  when  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  one  of  the  most  important  functions
of  the  teeth  is  mastication,  and  that  an  animal  cannot  maintain  good  health
if  it  is  imperfectly  performed.  Upon  sound  teeth  greatly  depends  perfect
mastication.  Before  assimilation  of  the  food  can  take  place  in  the  stomach
it  must  be  received  into  that  organ  in  a  fit  condition  for  the  process,  and
this  depends  upon  the  condition  of  the  teeth.  When  the  food  is  not  prop-
erly chewed,  it  acts  as  an  irritant  to  the  stomach  and  bowels,  causing  indi-
gestion and  diarrhea,  which  latter  in  puppies  often  proves  fatal.
"Generally  speaking,  the  teeth  do  not  receive  any  attention  until  they
decay,  and  cause  pain  or  stomach  trouble.  Preventative  measures  are  in
my  experience  seldom  taken,  though  it  is  quite  as  necessary  for  a  dog  to
have  clean  teeth  as  it  is  for  ourselves.
"The  teeth  especially  require  attention  in  the  case  of  dogs  which  are
fed  upon  an  unsuitable  diet,  as  they  become  furred,  and  finally  accumtila-
tions  of  tartar  exist.  To  avoid  this  they  should  be  gone  over  once  a  day
with  an  ordinary  toothbrush,  dipped  into  weak  Condy's  Fluid.  This-  will  not
only  prevent  decay,  but  also  keeps  the  breath  sweet,  a  most  important  mat-
ter where  the  dog  is  one's  constant  companion.  Fetid  breath,  however,  is
not  always  due  to  the  teeth,  but  to  indigestion  as  a  result  of  their  condi-
tion;  at  times,  too,  especially  when  the  teeth  are  irregular,  food  accumu-
lates between  them!  this  should  be  removed  with  the  brush.  That  dogs  are
frequently  the  subject  of  toothache  cannot  be  doubted,  and  is  clearly  shown
by  the  swelling  of  the  cheek,  and  often  by  the  formation  of  abscesses.  All
decayed  teeth  that  are  past  preserving  should  be  extracted  by  a  competent
person."
Turnside. — The  dog  has  no  fit  in  this  disease,  but  walks  about  appar-
ently without  an-  object,  generally  in  circles  and  always  in  one  direction.
Youatt  ascribes  the  disease  to  the  presence  of  hytadids  in  the  brain,  but
results  of  more  recent  study  of  animal  parasites  are  opposed  to  this  view.
Worms  in  the  stomach  or  intestines  is  more  likely  to  be  the  cause.  Give
the  dog  a  few  doses  of  Sure  Shot,  Glover's,  Dent's  or  Clayton's  Vermifugs.
Also  put  the  dog  in  a  room  or  small  kennel  yard  where  he  can  not  injure
himself  by  running  against  things,  as  he  might,  due  to  his  sight  being  im-
paired.
"Tumors. — These  are  divided  into  groups  of  varying  structure — Fi-
brous, Fatty,  Calcareous,  Melanotic,  Osseous  and  Lacteal.
"Fibrous  Tumors  are  usually  situated  in  the  jaw  or  limbs,  they  have  a
firm  attachment  and  are  hard  and  insensible  to  the  touch.  Excision  is  ne-
cessary. In  the  centre  of  these  tumors  a  cyst,  or  cavity,  containing  serum
or  matter  (pus),  often  exists,  and  in  consequence  abscesses  form  upon
their  surface.
"Fatty  Tumors  are  commonly  met  with  in  the  dog,  and  have  no  particu-
lar position,  but  occur  at  any  part  of  the  body.  They  are  smooth  and  shiny
upon  their  surface,  unattached  to  the  surrounding  tissues,  they  seldom  be-
come inflamed,  and  are  not  tender  when  touched.  The  treatment  is  by
excision.
"Calcareous  Tumors. — These  are  common  in  bitches,  and  are  usually
situated  in  the  mammary  glands.  The  treatment  is  by  excision,  external
applications  being  of  no  avail.