bitch  or  a  dog  for  breeding  purposes  that  was  so  afflicted.  It  is,  of  course,
unpleasant  to  see  a  dog  constantly  twitching  or  jerking,  but  so  long  as  they
do  not  suffer  I  think  it  my  duty  to  let  them  live.
"This  most  distressing  complaint  arises  from  some  derangement  of
the  nervous  system,  and  generally  exists  as  a  sequence  of  distemper,  when
It  is  known  among  kennel  men  as  "the  twitch."  Chorea,  or  St.  Vitus'  dance,
may,  however,  arise  from  other  causes,  producing  a  disturbing  effect  on  the
nervous  system  such  as  a  severe  Injury  or  blow  on  the  head,  the  irrita-
tion caused  by  worms,  or  long-continued  Impaired  digestion.  By  far  the
most  common  cause,  however,  is  distemper,  the  brain  receiving  some  in-
jury in  that  variety  of  the  disease  known  as  "Head  Distemper."  The  symp-
tom Indicating  chorea  is  a  peculiar  Involuntary  convulsive  twitching  of
the  muscles.  These  spasmodic  movements  or  jerklngs  may  be  either  par-
tial or  general,  but  usually  partial.  One  or  both  hind  legs  are  affected,
or  the  twitching  extends  to  the  muscles  of  the  fore  legs,  neck  and  shoul-
ders, in  which  case  the  head  is  bobbed  up  and  down  in  a  silly,  helpless
manner.  Sometimes  the  eyelids  and  muscles  of  the  face  are  affected,  but
Whatever  part  of  the  body,  is  attacked  the  peculiar  twitching  or  jerking
Is  always  unmistakable.  When  the  hind  quarters  are  the  seat  of  the
disease  the  dog  will  sometimes  suddenly  drop  one  of  the  limbs  from  the
hip  joint,  apparently  from  sudden  loss  of  power  or  command  over  the
guiding  muscles.  The  weakness  is  strongly  shown  when  the  dog  attempts
to  jump  onto  a  chair  or  the  lap,  which  he  fails  to  do,  and  generally  falls
on  hte  side  "all  in  a  heap."  There  are  very  few  dogs  severely  afflicted  with
r     •    -
chorea  that  ever  get  completely  cured.  When  the  attack  is  but  slight  the
dog  may  live  for  years  and  prove  a  useful  animal,  as,  except  in  severe
cases,  it  does  not  seem  to  greatly  impair  the  general  health.  The  con-
stant twitching  is,  however,  so  annoying  a  sight  to  most  people  that  few
would  care  to  keep  a  dog  thus  afflicted.  Although  dogs  carefully  and
properly  treated  in  distemper  are  less  likely  to  suffer  from  this  disease,
yet  it  will  occasionally  occur  in  the  best  managed  kennels,  and  so  I  must
proceed  to  consider  its  treatment.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  attend
to  the  general  health,  and  especially  to  see  that  the  bowels  are  in  a  properly
regulated  state;  and  it  is  better,  if  their  action  requires  correction,  to
endeavor  to  accomplish  that  object  by  a  careful  regulation  of  diet,  rather
than  by  a  resort  to  physic;  indeed,  all  through  chorea  the  food  must  be
of  a  nature  easily  digested  and  given  with  regularity  if  any  course  of
medicinal  treatment  is  to  be  successful.  The  remedies  recommended  in
chorea  are  arsenic,  sulphate  of  zinc,  nitrate  of  silver  and  nux  vomica  and
its  preparations.  Arsenic  I  do  not  recommend,  but  either  of  the  following
may  be  tried,  and  it  is  sometimes  found  that  using  them  alternately  has
a  more  beneficial  effect  than  a  perseverance  with  one  remedy  only.  Pills
may  be  made  thus:
Sulphate  of  Zinc.  Pills.
Sulphate   of  zinc    2  4   grains
Extract   of  gentian    18   grains
Powdered  gum  acacia 18  grains
Make  into  twelve  pills.  Dose  for  a  dog  30-lb.  to  50-lb.  weight,  one
pill  twice  a  day.    Small  dogs  a  half  pill  as  a  dose.
Nitrate  of  Silver  Pills.
Nitrate  of  silver   3  grains
Bread    2  drams
Make  into  twenty-four  pills.  Dose  for  a  dog  30-lb.  to  50-lb.  weight,  one
pill  twice  a  day  given  at  the  time  of  feeding.  Small  toy  dogs  of
10  to  12  lbs.  give  one-half  a  pill  as  a  dose.
The  following  pills  I  have  found  Very  successful,  and  can  Btrongly
recommend  them,  although,  of  course,  they  a/e  not  infallible.  As  the
ingredients  require  very  great  accuracy  in  weighing,  and  very  careful
mixing,  this  must  be  left  to  a  properly  qualified  dispensing  chemist,  and
the  box  containing  the  pills  should  be  kept  strictly  in  the  master's  pos-
session, for  fear  of  accident:
Strychnine    1  grain
Quinine    18  grains
Extract  of  belladonna 6  grains
Extract  of  gentian    1   dram
Powder  for  Compond  Rhubarb  Pill 1  dram
Mix  very  carefully  and  divide  into  forty-eight  pills.     Dose  for  a  dpg
20-lb.  to  40-lb.  weight,  one  pill  twice  a  day  with  his  food.     Small
dogs,  half  a  pill.     St.  Bernards,  one  and  one-half  pills  as  a  dose.
"It  is  necessary  in  chorea  to  continue  the  use  of  these  remedies  for  a
considerable  time — at  least  a  month  or  two  months,  in  most  cases — to
produce  any  satisfactory  result,  or  even  to  give  them  a  fair  trial;  and,  as
before  said,  the  dog  must  be  carefully  fed,  well  lodged  and  properly  exer-
cised when  he  has  sufficient  power  to  use  his  limps,  and  in  the  case  of  dogs
reared  in  towns,  a  change  to  the  country  for  some  weeks  would  be  beneficial.
Galvanism  has  been  recommended  for  chorea;  I  have  not  seen  it  tried,  but
should  think  it  well  worth  a  trial."
Here  are  two  different  cases  of  chorea  prescribed  for  by  the  American
Field:
"About  two  months  since  I  bred  a  young  pug  bitch,  and  shortly  after-
ward I  noticed  a  nervous  affection  in  her  face;  just  about  as  regular  as
a  clock  would  tick  the  lower  jaw  would  drop  and  raise  again,  and  for  a  while
her  tongue  would  hang  out  at  one  side  as  if  partially  paralyzed.  "What  is
the  probable  cause,  and  what  treatment  should  she  have?  She  did  not
whelp,  and  this  was  her  first  mating.  Ans. — Chorea;  give  two  drops  of
Fowler's  Solution  of  Arsenic  three  times  daily  for  six  consecutive  days,  then
increase  the  dose  one  drop  daily  until  fifteen  drops  are  given  at  each  and
every  dose;   continue  this  for  one  week,  then  decrease  in  the  same  raitio.
"Please  prescribe  for  my  English  setter  bitch  that  has  had,  for  the
last  two  months,  a  severe  jerking  in  her  fore  legs,  seeming  to  be  worse,
in  damp  weather;  otherwise  she  is  apparently  in  good  health.  The  bitch
had  the  distemper  about  two  or  three  months  ago.  Ans. — Chorea.  For
ten  consecutive  days  give  ten  grains  of  iodide  of  potash  three  times  daily,
then  give  six  drops  of  Fowler's  Solution  three  times  daily  for  seven  con-
secutive days,  and  on  the  eighth  day  increase  the  dose  one  drop  daily
until  thirty  drops  are  given  at  each  and  every  dose;  continue  this  for
fourteen  days  then  decrease  in  the  same  raitio."  The  electric  battery  has
proved  of  great  benefit  in  many  cases.
The  two  above  cases  of  chorea  in  a  pug  and  an  English  setter  gives
you  the  old  and  well-known  Fowlers'  Solution  of  Arsenic  treatment,  and
prbper  sized  doses,  if  you  wish  to  try  it.     This  is  the  old-time  remedy  and
has  cured  Chorea  when  directions  were  carefully  followed.
■•.-.,
The  following  article  on  Chorea  was.  written  especially  for  .this', book
by  Dent:
"Chorea  is  the  most  distressing  nervous  complaint  dog  owners  are
familiar  with.  It  is  due  to  an  involuntary  nervous  discharge  of  the  motor
cells  controlling  certain  muscles.  The  essential  pathology  of  these  more
or  less  constant  muscular  twitchings  has  baffled  all  scientific  investigation,
and  careful  microscopic  autopsies,  extending  from  the  nerve  terminus  in  a
muscle  back  to  the  cord  and  brain,  have  failed  to  reveal  a  lesion  that  can
be  considered  a  cause.
"The  most  satisfactory  theory  is  that  the  brain  cells  controlling  a
certain  muscle  or  set  of  muscles  are  so  weakened  by  the  poison  of  distemper
or  some  other  cause  as  to  cause  them  to  send  out  muscular  impulses  with-
out natural  mental  impulse  or  will  power.
.
"There  is  a  form  of  chorea,  clue  to  a  disturbed  nervous  system,  induced
by  blows  or  injuries  to  the,  or  the  presence  of  intestinal  parasites  which
have  deranged  the,  digestive  organs.  This  form  of  chorea  is  generally
curable.  The  form  which  follows  distemper  is  not  so  amenable  to  treat-
ment.
"The  symptoms  are  so  prominent  and  characteristic  that  there  is  no
mistaking  the  disease,  and  the  peculiar  involuntary  twitching  of  the  muscles
once  seen  is  never  forgotten.  Then  entire  body  may  be  affected;  generally
it  is  only  one  set  of  muscles,  those  of  the  foreleg  or  of  the  neck  and  shoul-
ders, in  which  case  the  head  bobs  up  and  down  in  a  most  helpless  manner.
Where  the  hindlegs  are  affected  the  dog  will  suddenly  drop  one'  of  the  limbs
from  the  hip  downward  as  if  there  was  an  entire  loss  of  strength  and
power.  This  is  particularly  noticeable  if  it  attempts  to  jump  on  a  chair
or  table,  for,  after  one  or  two  attempts,  it  falls  on  its  side  or  in  a  heap,
completely  helpless.
"The  top  of  the  head  is  often  affected  and  twitches  and  throbs  in  a
most  peculiar  manner,  and  the  jerking  is  commonly  observable  about  the
muscles  of  the  eyelids,  lips  and  face.  In  severe  cases  of  chorea  the  gen-
eral health  is  affected,  and  the  animal  shows  signs  of  suffering  probably
due  to  anxiety  and  appreciation  of  its  helpfulness.  In  mild  cases  it  does
not  affect  the  animal's  general  health,  and  some  field  dogs  have  it  all
their  lives  without  affecting  their  usefulness.  The  owner,  however,
is  annoyed  by  the  constant  muscular  movements  and  is  always  anxious  to
effect  a  cure.     Some  cases  are  quiet  during  sleep,  others  are  worse.
"Treatment. — Although  the  disease  occurs  in  the  best  regulated  ken-
nels, despite  the  most  careful  treatment  of  distemper,  it  does  not  alter  the
fact  that  dogs  properly  treated  for  distemper  and  worms  and  well  housed
and  fed  are  less  liable  to  the  disease  than  those  which  are  neglected.
"The  first  thing  to  do  is  to  look  after  the  animal's  general  health.
See  that  the  bowels  act  promptly  and  this  is  accomplished  best  by  dieting
and  the  feeding  of  foods  possessing  laxative  properties  and  not  by  resorting
to  physics.  If  there  is  the  slightest  suspicion  of  worms  treat  for  them,
as  they  torment  the  nervous  system  beyond  all  measure  and  are  the  cause
of  many  attacks.
"Feed  regularly  and  carefully,  and  if  there  is  a  tendency  to  constipa-
tion use  well  boiled  oatmeal.  Mutton  broths  with  stale  bread,  beef  well
boiled  or  raw  lean  beef  chopped  fine.  From  two  to  five  grains  of  pepsin
and  one-half  grain  of  diastase  can  be  given  after  each  meal,  to  assist  the
stomach  in  the  process  of  digestion.  If  there  is  much  debility  and  weak-
ness give  emulson  of  cod  liver  oil  in  doses  of  from  one  teaspoonful  to
three  tablespoonfuls  three  or  four  times  a  day.
"The  drugs  principally  used  are  mix  vomica  or  strychnine  and  arsenic.
Some  practitioners  use  a  dose  of  nux  vomica  in  the  morning  and  arsenic  at
night.  As  both  of  these  drugs  are  poisonous  they  must  be  used  with  care.
The  dose  of  nux  vomica  is  from  two  to  twelve  drops  of  the  tincture  twice
a  day.  It  is  a  valuable  vegetable,  bitter,  and  an  aid  to  digestion  as  well
as  a  nerve  stimulant.  Any  stiffness  of  the  muscles  or  tendency  to  spasms
is  an  indication  for  its  immediate  discontinuance.
"Fowler's  Solution  of  Arsenic  is  the  most  convenient  form.     The  dose
46  DISEASE3
is  from  one  to  thirty  drops.  Give  a  drop  at  first,  increasing  it  one  drop
a  day  up  to  the  larger  dose,  then  gradually  decreasing  and  discontinue
for  a  time,  and  whenever  there  is  any  constitutional  symptoms  of  its  ef-
fects, such  as  reddened  or  fullness  under  the  eye,  nausea,  whitish  tongue,
etc.
"The  following  pills  are  highly  recommended  by  many  who  have  used
•them.  As  some  of  the  ingredients  are  poisonous,  they  should  be  prepar-
ed by  a  qualified  druggist  or  pharmacy  graduate.  Strychnine  one  grain,
extract  of  belladonna  six  grains,  extract  of  gentian  one  dram,  gipsin  three
drams.  .  Mix  carefully  and  divide  into  forty-eight  pills,  one  of  which  is
to  be  given  night  and  morning  in  the  patient's  food.  This  dose  is  for  a
dog  weighing   from   thirty   to   fifty  pounds.
"The  medicines  heretofore  mentioned  are,  in  their  action,  purely  alter-
ative and  nerve  stimulating;  in  connection  with  them  may  be  mentioed
the  use  of  the  electrical  current  from  a  surgeon's  battery.  Obstinate  and
apparently  incurable  cases  sometimes  show  a  decided  improvement,  and
radical  cures  are  effected,  in  response  to  a  gentle  stimulating  current  of
electricity.  One  electrode  should  be  applied  to  the  neck  directly  over  the
spinal  cord,  the  other  to  the  extremity  of  the  affected  leg,  and  the  electrical
stimulation  continued  for  from  five  to  thirty  minutes  twice  a  day.  The
beneficial  effects  from  a  careful  massage  of  the  leg  and  a  manipulation  of
the  muscles  cannot  be  overestimated.  Besides  breaking  down  adhesions
or  agglutinations  of  the  muscle  fibers,  it  increases  the  supply  of  blood  to
the  part  and  promotes  its  nutrition  and  has  a  most  beneficial  reflex  action
on   the-  entire   nervous   system."
Cramp.— This  term  is  often  indiscriminately  applied  by  sportsmen
to  spasm  from  whatever  cause;  but  cramp  of  the  limbs  from  exposure  to
cold  and  wet  often  occurs,  and  it  will  quickly  yield  to  brisk  rubbing  and
warmth.  If  nothing  else  is  handy,  rub  with  a  little  spirit  and  water  or  a
rough  dry  cloth.  Dogs  used  in  hunting  or  retrieving  from  water  are  very
liable  to  it,  the  hindquarters  being  most  frequently  affected,  and  in  such
cases  a  good  brisk  liniment,  such  as  the  following,  should  be  carried  in  the
boat:
Stimulating  Liniment. — Compound  camphor  liniment,  3  oz.;  olive  oil,
spirit  of  turpentine,  and  spirit  of  hartshorn,  of  each  1  oz.;  mix.  A  hot  bath
is  also  very  effective,  especially  if  the  dog  is  afterward  gently  rubbed;
care  must,  however,  be  taken  to  dry  the  animal  thoroughly.
Crooked  Limbs. — See   Rickets.
Cancer. — This  can  only  safely  be  treated  by  the  verterinary  surgeon.
The  main  thing  for  the  dog's  owner  is  to  be  able  to  distinguish  between
cancer  and  other  tumors.  The  safest  plan  is,  however,  not  to  take  any
chance  by  delay,  but  on  suspicion  consult  the  veterinarian.
Choking. — This  accident  is  not  uncommon  with  greedy  animals  that
bolt  their  food;  a  bone,  a  piece  of  gristly  meat,  or  other  hard  substance,
is  bolted,  and  sticks   fast  in  its  passage  to   the  stomach.      I  always  adopt
the  plan  of  reserving  bones  until  after  the  clogs  have  fed,  for  if  given  with
the  other  food  they  are  at  once  picked  out,  and  the  smaller  ones  are,
when  the  dog  is  hungry,  apt  to  be  swallowed  unmasticated  and  produce
choking.
Treatment. — Frequently  by  manipulating  the  throat  outside  with  the
fingers  the  obstruction  can  be  worked  down  the  gullet,  or  if  it  can  be  felt
in  the  upper  part  of  the  throat,  it  may  be  removed  by  the  throat  forceps,
which  most  veterinary  surgeons  keep  by  them.  Hill  recommends,  when  the
substance  is  too  low  for  extraction,  and  manipulating  with  the  fingers
externally  fails,  to  endeavor  gently  to  force  it  down  with  a  piece  of  bent
whalebone,  having  a  piece  of  sponge  tied  to  the  end  of  it,  and  dipped  in
oil.  In  using  this  extra  care  must  be  taken  that  the  sponge  is  so  firmly
attached  to  the  whalebone  that  it  cannot  slip  off,  for  if  swallowed  it  might
effectually  block  up  one  of  the  smaller  intestines;  therefore,  cut  nitches
in  the  whalebone,  into  which- tie  the  piece  of  sponge.  As  soreness,  if  not
actual  laceration,  is  almost  sure  to  be  caused,  the  dog  should  for  some
days  after  be  confined  to  soft  food.
The  following,  on  choking,  I  found.  The  subject  is  so  ably  treated,
that   I   publish  it  also:
"This  is  of  very  frequent  occurrence  with  dogs,  as  usually  they  are
voracious  feeders,  careless  of  consequences,  and  the  fact  that  they  use
their  mouths  much  as  we  do  our  hands  in  grasping  and  conveying  various
objects  makes  them  particularly  liable  to  swallow  foreign  substances,  that
may  become  lodged  in  the  gullet.  The  commonest  objects  on  which  dogs
choke  are  bones  that  they  have  been  feeding  upon.  If  the  bone  lodges
in  the  back  of  the  throat  it  may  set  up  such  a  violent  coughing  and
retching  as  to  asphyxiate  the  subject.  The  back  of  the  throat,  however,  is
not  the  usual  lodging  place,  for  as  a  rule  the  bone  or  other  object  passes
that  point,  where  the  gullet  is  comparatively  large,  and  lodges  over  the
heart,  where  it  is  smaller.  Locating  at  this  point  causes  the  greatest
distress.  The  dog  keeps  gulping  as  if  trying  to  swallow,  and  from  time
to  time  is  seized  with  a  period  of  retching.  In  a  day  or  two  the  extreme
distress  passes,  and  the  patient  drinks  water  and  milk  or  other  liquids
freely  and  can  also  swallow  raw  eggs,  but  if  solid  food  is  taken,  directly
it  reaches  the  obstruction  it  lodges.  Young  dogs  and  those  which  are
playful  sometimes  swallow  needles  and  pins.  These  usually  become
imbedded  in  the  back  of  the  tongue,  and  can  be  removed  from  that  position,
but  sometimes  they  reach  the  gullet  and  pass  through  into  the  tissues,
forming  an  abscess,  their  usual  location  being  just  behind  the  angle  of
the  jaw.  Removing  needles  and  pins  from  the  back  of  the  tongue  is  done
most  easily  with  a  pair  of  forceps,  although  it  sometimes  can  be.  done  with
the  finger.  The  principal  thing  is  to  be  careful  not  to  break  the  object.
The  symptoms  in  these  cases  are  usually  very  severe,  so  that  prompt  action
is  necessary.  In  those  cases  where  a  bone  has  pased  far  down  the  gullet-
and  lodged  over  the  heart  it  is  sometimes  sufficient  to  feed  the  dog  a  few
pieces  of  meat,  which  will  force  the  obstruction  on.  If  this  is  not  success-
ful a  probang  must  be  uesd  to  force  the  obstruction  down  into  the  stom-
ach, but  this  should  be  attempted  only  by  a  skillful  veterinarian  or  a
physician,   as  it  may  be  necessary  to  use  considerable   force,   and   there  is
danger  of  rupturing  the  gullet,,  which,  is  fatal.  If  the  obstruction  cannot
be  removed  by  the  probang,  then  the  only  thing  remaining  is  to  feed
the  patient  on  liquid  food  until  such  time  as  the  sharp  points  of  the  bone
become  dissolved  and  rounded  off,  so  that  it  will  be  easily  pushed  along
by  the  probang."  _
CHLOROFORMING  DOGS  FOR  AN  OPERATION.
If  it  is  really  necessary  to  do  this,  then  have  a  careful  anethetist  who
understands  his  subject,  do  the  work.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  is  long  enough
for  a  dog  to  be  kept  under  the  influence,  and  should  be  ample  time  for  any
operation.  Chloroform  is  dangerous,  at  best,  with  any  dogs,  and  with  some
breeds,  Chow  Chows  for  instance,  it  is  sure  to  mean  a  dead  dog.  Anyone
who  has  had  experience  in  the  destruction  of  dogs  with  chloroform,  knows
how  quickly  they  succumb  to  it.  Ether  is  a  safer  anesthetic,  which  can
be  used  with  as  much  success  and   far  less   risk.
If  an  anesthetic  has  to  be  given,  ask  the  operating  surgeon  to  use
ether.  The  bet  way  to  give  an  anesthetic:  put  on  a  wire  cage  muzzle,
having  first  secured  dog  so  he  cannot  struggle.  Around  the  muzzle  an
ordinary  piece  of  surgeon's  list  can  be  placed,  and  on  this  the  anesthetic.
For  many  minor  operations,  liquid  cocaine  can  be  used  instead,  the
dog  strapped  down,  and  his  owner  also  hold  and  control  his  dog.  I  have
done  this  without  the  strapping  even,  talked  to  the  dog,  he  understood  me,
and  stood  the  pain.  This  was  the  removal  of  a  cyst  on  a  Pug  dog,  behind
his  ear,  the  size  of  a  lemon.     Cocaine  was  used.
Coryza. — See   Catarrh.
Costiveness. — See  Constipation.
Caked  Breast. — This  is  generally  caused  by  milk  fever,  a  too  plentiful
supply  of  milk  which  is  not  nursed  sufficiently  from  the  dam  by  a  small
litter,  or  will  happen  in  cases  of  the  bitch  loosing  her  puppies.  She  must
be  milked  three  times  daily  by  hand  (this  done  gently  on  teats  that  are
hard  and  caked)  for  a  few  days,  gradually  getting  down  to  twice,  and  then
once  a  day,  stopping  as  the  flow  of  milk  gets  less.
Also  use  quite  often,  every  two  hours  or  so,  camphorated  oil  or  gum
camphor  and  lard  melted  together  (which  should  be  kept  in  a  corked
jar),  rubbing  this  in  well  on  all  the  teats.  This  will  dry  up  the  milk,
soften  up  the  caked  breasts  and  dry  up  the  hanging  down  bag  as  well,
making  the  bitch  more  sightly  looking.  A  solution  of  camphor,  tannin
and  glycerine,  which  any  druggist  can  put  up  for  you,  is  the  very  best
thing  to  use  alone  for  drying  up  the  bags  of  a  bitch  after  she  has  weaned