the  following  prescription,  which  was  found  to  be  very  valuable  in  the
treatment  of  such  cases  in  the  human  race — of  soldiers  who  contracted  this
disease  in  the  war  of  '61.  A  friend  of  mine,  a  noted  doctor  in  human  prac-
tice, gave  it  to  me  and  I  "tried  it  on  a  dog,"  succeeding  in  effecting  a  per-
manent cure,  since  which  time  I  have  used  it  in  several  such  cases  with
success.  Take  sima  ruba  bark,  two  ounces,  and  put  it  in  a  quart  of  water,
boil  this  down  to  a  pint,  then  strain  and  boil  this  down  to  half  a  pint.
(Be  careful  to  not  burn.)  The  dose  for  a  dog  the  size  of  a  pointer  would
be  a  teaspoonful  three  times  a.  day.  Large  dogs  like  a  St.  Bernard,  two
teaspoonfuls  at  a  dose,  while  very  small  toy  dogs  like  a  toy  terrier,  should
have  half  a  teaspoonful  at  a  time.
The  following  prescription  was  furnished  me  by  Mr.  J.  A.  Rogers,  of
Ironton,  Ohio,  after  trying  it  on  his  pointer  that  had  suffered  with  chronic
dysentery  for  over  a  month  till  the  dog  was  a  skeleton  and  could  hardly
stand  up.  This  dog  had  been  treated  for  worms,  at  first  supposed  to  be
the  cause  of  the  trouble,  and  several  well-known  remedies  tried,  but  no
worms  and  no  stoppage  of  the  dysentery.  As  a  last  resort  he  tried  this
prescription,  and  cured  the  dog.  From  a  full  history  of  this  extreme  case,
furnished  me  by  several  letters  during  its  duration,  I  have  concluded  that
this  is  a  very  valuable  remedy  and  likely  to  cure  when  everything  else  fails:
Specific  aconite    10   drops
Specific    baptisia 10   drops
Specific    ipecac    15   drops
Specific  ecefolta    " 1  dram-
Glycerine    •  •  •  .      4  drams
Add  water   (distilled)   to  make   8   ounces
Of  the  first  four  articles  use  only  Lloyd  Bros.'  preparations — a  Cincinnati
wholesale  drug  firm.  If  your  druggist  doesn't  have  them  in  stock,  he  can
get  them  by  ordering  from  Lloyd  Bros.',  or  I  can  get  this  prescription
filled  and  send  you.  The  dose  would  be  at  first — until  you  see  a  change
for  the  better — a  teaspoonful  every  hour  until  three  or  four  doses  are  given,
then  every  two  hours.  Of  course,  if  the  patient  should  be  a  very  young
puppy,  the  dose  should  be  smaller,  but  such  cases  of  dysentery  are  seldom
found  in  puppies,  except  when  a  very  great  looseness  of  the  bowels  appears,
generally  due  to  worms;  such  cases  very  likely  will  be  cured  by  proper
worm  treatment,  which  find  under  heading  of  Worms.  In  above  pre-
scription the  ecefolta  is  most  excellent  for  the  blood,  blood-poisoning  and
as  a  disinfectant  to  kill  germs,  and  to  reduce  fever,  which  every  dog  has
in  a  case  of  dysentery.  Dog  also  has  a  cold  which  the  aconite  will  relieve.
The  baptisia  is  for  fever  and  the  blood,  the  ipecac  for  the  stomach  and
mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.  I  will  add  here  that  this
remedy  was  intended  by  the  regular  doctor,  who  prescribed  it  for  this  dog
— for  humans,  but  was  tried,  and  successfully,  on  the  dog  in  this  case.
Worms  may  have  been  the  original  cause  of  this  case  of  dysentery.  Dry
browned  toast  soaked  in  meat  broths  or  gravy  is  very  good  food  to  use  in
such   cases   of  dysentery.
Dent  has  written  especially  for  this  book  the  following  on  Dysentery:
"This  disease  is  frequently  neglected  with  the  false  hope  that  it  will
cure  itself.  It  is  a  serious  affection  and  demands  prompt  care  and  treat-
ment. Causes  are  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lower
bowels  or  large  intestines,  accompanied  by  ulceration,  and  in  many  cases
bleeding.  The  action  of  poisons,  eating  of  putrid  food,  rapid'  changes  from
heat  to  cold  and.  vice  versa,  also  the  after-effects  of  inflammation  of  the
small  intestines.
"Symptoms. — At  first  there  is  a  loss  of  appetite,  restlessness,  painful
condition  of  the  bowels,  as  attested  by  pressure  on  the  belly.  The  nose  is
hot  and  dry,  the  animal  is  feverish,  and  at  first  constipated.  Afterwards
the  bowels,  after  more  or  less  straining,  begin  to  move,  the  passages  are
putrid  and  more  disagreeable,  become  more  frequent  and  tinged  with  blood
as  a  result  of  injury  to  the  bowels,  or  with  pus  as  a  result  of  ulceration.
"Treatment. — Give  a  dose  to  a  40-lb.  dog,  %oz.  each  of  olive  oil  and
castor  oil,  to  which  can  be  added  from  10  to  20  drops  of  laudanum;  small-
er and  larger  dogs  a  proportonate  dose.  Give  injections  of  boiled  starch
water,  with  20  to  40  drops  of  laudanum.  If  the  disease  has  become  chronic
it  may  be  necessary  to  try  several  different  prescriptions  before  arriving
at  a  cure.     Here  is  one:
Sub-nitrate    of   bismuth    2   drams
Ipecacuana   powdered    30  grains
Pepsin     1   dram
Siastrase    ,  4  grains
Dose. — Divide  into   12   powders  and  give  one  three  times  a  day.
"And  here  another:
Acid    tannic 2   drams
Opium  powdered    12   grains
Pepsin 1  dram
"Dose. — Divide  into  12  powders  and  give  one  three  times  a  day.  The
foregoing-sized  doses  are  based  on  a  40-lb.  dog.  Smaller  or  larger  dogs
in  proportion.  Feed  white  of  egg,  gelatin,  beef  tea,  lime  water  and
milk,  toast  and  beef  tea.     Keep  the  patient  warm  and  quiet."
Diarrhea. — Diarrhea  is  of  very  frequent  occurrence  in  dogs,  and  more
particularly  in  young,  puppies  and  in  old  and  overfed  dogs.  It  generally
exists  as  a  result  of  indigestion,  brought  on  by  improper  feeding.  The
practice  of  leaving  stale  food  from  one  meal  to  another  is  a  common  source
of  this  disease.  Diarrhea  may  be  classed  as  acute  and  chronic.  In  the
acute  form  there  is  much  looseness  of  the  bowels,  frequently  accompanied
or  preceded  by  copious  vomiting  of  acrid  offensive  matter;  the  evacua-
tions are  loose,  watery  and  offensive.  If  not  checked,  it  soon  produces
excessive  weakness,  and,  especially  in  puppies,  is  the  cause  of  great  mor-
tality. In  the  chronic  state  the  disease  is  slower  in  its  progress  and  longer
in  its  duration.  It  may  be  set  up  by  a  diseased  liver  and  excess  of  bile,  or
it  may  be  the  result  of  inflammation  of  the  bowels.  A  by  no  means  un-
common cause  is  the  abuse  of  calomel  and  other  mercurials,  these  being
"specifics"  with  many  persons  for  all  dog  diseases.  Diarrhea  often  finishes
up  the  work  of  distemper,  and  this  is  so  in  most  cases  where,  as  too  fre-
quently happens,  mercurials  have  been  relied  on  as  a  cure  for  that  dis-
ease. Worms  are  also  a  common  cause  of  diarrhea,  and  when  these  exist
the  nature  of  the  discharge  is  variable,  frequent  and  small  in  quantity,
Sometimes  lumpy,  followed  by  gelatinous,  glary  matter,  and  often  frothy
and  covered  with  small  air  bubbles.  When  worms  appear  to  be  the  cause,
means  should  be  taken  to  expel  them  as  directed  later  on.  Exhalations
from  accumulations  of  filth,  and  especially  in  low  lying,  damp  and  badly
drained  and  badly  ventilated  kennels,  are  also  a  cause  of  diarrhea,  and
one  which  never  should  exist.  In  treating  diarrhea  it  is  often  of  con-
siderable advantage  to  give  a  mild  purge  to  remove  the  irritating  cause.
Castor  oil  is  very  suitable;  and,  if  there  is  evidence  of  much  pain  attend-
ing the  disease,  a  dose  of  laudanum,  from  20  to  30  drops,  may  be  added.
As  a  remedy  in  diarrhea  I  know  of  nothing  equal  to  the  following  mix-
ture, which  very  rarely  fails  to  check  it  if  the  patient  at  the  same  time
receives  proper  attention  in  other  respects:
Astringent  Anodyne  Mixture  for  Diarrhea.
Take  prepared  chalk 3   drams
Aramatic   confection    (powder)     :  .    2   drams
Powdered  gum  acacia 1   dram
(Laudanum)    tincture  of  opium    1   ounce
Oil  of  cassia   6   or  8   drops
Tincture  of  catechu    3  drams
Spiritis  of  sal  volatile' 2    drams
Water  sufficient  to  make   8   ounces      •
The  powders  must  be  rubbed  very  fine  in  a  mortar,  the  oil  of  cassia  within
them;  the  water  must  be  gradually  added,  rubbing  well  to  form  a  smooth
mixture.  The  tincture  added  in  the  bottle.  Of  this  mixture  the  dose  will
be  from  a  half  to  two  teaspoonfuls  for  puppies,  and  from  one  to  two  table-
spoonfuls  for  full-grown  dogs,  given  every  three  or  four  hours,  as  long  as
the  purging  continues.  The  bottle  must  be  well  shaken  before  measuring
the  dose.
When  getting  this  filled,  I  would  advise,  either  taking  your  book
to  the  druggist,  or  copying  and  showing  him  as  to  the  mixing  of  the  above.
For  convenience  of  form  the  following  may,  under  circumstances,  be
preferred,  as  it  keeps  well  and  is  in  less  compass:*
Spirits   of  camphor    2  drams
Laudanum     xk  ounce
Spirits  of  volatile    '.  .    2  drams
Tincture  of  catechu 1  ounce
Mix.  Dose,  from  twenty  drops  to  a  teaspoonful  in  water  every  three  or
four  hours,  if  required.
"The  diet  must  be  carefully  regulated  all  through  the  disease;  such
light  and  easily-digested  food  as  well  boiled  oatmeal,  rice  or  arrowroot
should  be  given,  with  milk  or  beef  tea,  and  if  the  patient  refuses  to  feed,
a  little  should  be  given  with  a  spoon  or  a  drencher  every  two  or  three
hours;  when  the  dog  is  very  weak,  add  a  little  port  wine  to  the  food;  in-
stead of  plain  water,  give  rice  or  barley  water  to  drink.  In  the  case  of
bitches  suckling,  the  diet  must  be  changed,  a  dose  of  castor  oil  given,  and
the  'astringent  anodyne  mixture'  in  small  closes,  or  an  injection  may.  be
administered.
"If  the  diarrhea  is  very  persistent,  and  accompanied  by  blood,  inject
twice  a  day  into  the  rectum  2  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  sulphate  of  copper  with  15  to
60  drops  of  tincture  of  opium  in  4  oz.  of  water.  If  this  does  not  check  it,
then  give  %  gr.  to  Vz  gr.  of  sulphate  of  copper,  increasing  the  dose  to
1  gr.  with   V2   gr.  to   1  gr.  of  powdered  opium.
"It  is  most  important  that  rigorous  cleanliness  should  be  observed.
All  discharges  should  be  immediately  removed,  and  the  animal  kept  clean
by  sponging  with  lukewarm  water  if  necessary,  while  disinfectants  should
be  sprinkled  'about.  The  patient  should  also  be  kept  warm,  and  left  as
quiet  and  undisturbed  as  possible.
Dr.  Clayton's  diarrhea  cure  I  have  found  a  very  good  remedy  in  many
cases.  Spratt's  Patent  (see  advertisement)  makes  a  diarrhea  pill  that  I
have  often  used  on  my  dogs,  and  with  great  success,  in  checking  up  this
trouble,  which  is  often  caused  in  dogs  at  a  show  by  the  change  in  water
drank  there  and  on  the  trip.  A  tablet  or  pill  is  often  more  easily  admin-
istered than  a  liquid.
A  party  wrote  as  to  a  diarrhea  from  distemper  in  a  six-months-old
pointer  puppy,  just  over  the  distemper,  that  is  getting  along  nicely  and
has  a  fairly  good  appetitte,  but  is  bothered  with  diarrhea.  His  passages
are  very  thin  and  very  offensive.  The  puppy  tries  to  do  something  quite
often,  and  then  walks  all  over  the  kennel  yard  and  passes  a  few  drops  only.
At  the  first  stage  of  the  distemper  I  doctored  him  for  worms  and  took  many
from  him.  For  the  last  five  or  six  weeks  I  have  fed  him  on  eggs  and  milk,
boiled  together,  with  a  few  crackers  in  each  mess.  The  diarrhea  seems  to
hold  him  back  so  he  don't  get  fat  as  he  should.  The  answer  was  to  give
the  dog  the  following,  and,  if  necessary,  to  repeat  the  dose:
Chalk    5  grains
Laudanum     5  grains
Ether     5   drops
Mix  and  give  in  soup  or  milk;  continue  same  feeding  and  to  also  give  dry,
well-browned  toast  soaked  in  meat  broths  or  meat  gravy  made  with  flour
in  it.     Understand  that  the  above  prescription  was  for  one  dose.
Dislocations. — It  is  much  the  safest  and  best  plan  in  such  cases  to  at
once  summon  the  veterinarian,  and  not  trust  to  yourself,  as  the  veretin-
arian's  knowledge  of  anatomy  and  experience  in  operations  of  this  kind
enables  him  to  perform  it  more  readily,  and  with  the  least  pain  possible
to  the  dog.  If  you  are  situated  so  that  you  cannot  secure  the  veterinary,
first  examine  and  determine  in  what  direction  the  bone  is  parted  from  its
socket;  for  instance,  in  dislocation  of  the  hip,  the  head  of  the  thigh  bone
is  generally  carried  upwards  and  backwards,  this  being  apparent  to  the
eye,  as  the  injured  side  is  thereby  made  higher  and  can  readily  be  felt.
Have  an  assistant  to  hold  the  dog  around  the  loins  steady  in  one  position,
while  you  take  hold  of  the  dislocated  limb  above  the  stifle  joint,  which  will
retract  the  thigh  bone  downward  and  forward.  In  similar  operations  you
must  be  guided  by  the  same  principle.  Rest  will  be  needed  for  the  pa-
tient, and  violent  exercise  must  not  be  allowed  for  some  time.  There  is
always  a  disposition  to  a  repetition  of  a  dislocation.
Dropsy. — This  is  an  unnatural  accumulation,  of  water  in  different  parts
of  the  body,  as  in  water  on  the  brain,  dropsy  of  the  chest,  dropsy  of  the
skin,  and  dropsy  of  the  belly;  and  it  is  the  last-named  to  which  the  dog
is  most  liable.  Dropsy  is  generally,  if  not  always,  the  result  of  some  other
debilitating  disease,  and  especially  of  inflammatory  disorders;  but  it  may
be  brought  on  by  unsuitable  diet,  or  by  the  abuse  of  drastic  purgatives.
With  the  development  of  shows  a  new  danger  has  sprung  up,  as  dogs  are
too  often  kept  on  their  benches  to  the  suppression  of  the  discharge  of  thf'
excretions,  which  is  a  recognized  caused  of  inducing  dropsy.  Dropsy  of  the
belly  need  not  in  the  bitch  be  mistaken  for  pregnacy,  for  in  the  latter
the  teats  enlarge  with  the  belly,  which  is  altogether  firmer,  and  does  not
droop  until  just  before  whelping,  while  the  puppies  can  be  felt  through  the
abdominal  walls.  In  dropsy  the  belly  is  more  pendulous  and  baggy,  the
back  is  arched,  and  the  water  moves  readily  under  pressure;  the  dropsical
animal,  too,  is  generally  poor  in  flesh  and  harsh  in  coat.  The  medicines
principally  employed  in  dropsy  are  iodine,  iron  and  other  mineral  tonics,
with  digitalis  and  diuretics;  5  to  15  drops  of  benzoate  of  ammonium,  or
1  to  3  drops  of  oil  of  juniper,  with  5  to  20  drops  of  tincture  of  nux  vomica,
in  water,  three  times  a  day,  are  also  useful  in  treating  the  disease  which,
however,  is  always  best  left  to  a  veterinary  surgeon.
Dyspepsia. — See  Indigestion.
Diabetes. — This  is  an  increased  abnormal  flow  of  urine,  the  cause
being  a  derangement  of  some  of  the  assimilative  organs,  and  when  long
established  producing  great  emaciation  and  weakness.  First,  give  a  few
doses  of  mild  purgative,  of  the  "podophyllin  pills."
Podolphyllin    3  grains
Compound  extract  of  colocynth   15  grains
Powdered    rhubarb    24  grains
Extract  of  henbane 18  grains
Mix  and  divide  into  12  pills.  Dose  one  or  two  pills,  according  to  size  of
dog.     One  or  two  doses  probably  enough,  if  it  moves  the  bowels.
To  allay  the  thirst,  always  present  in  diabetes,  give  (twice  a  day)  5
to  30  drops  (according  to  size  of  dog)  of  phosphoric  acid,  largely  diluted
with  water,  and-  to  strengthen  the  system,  2  to  5  grains  of  sulphate  of  iron
twice  a  day  in  water.  If  the  excessive  flow  of  urine  continues  after  this,
then  use  the  following.
Astringent  Bolus  for  Diabetes — Take
Gallic    acid    1  dram
Powdered  alum    1   dram
Powdered   opium    12   grains
Gum  sufficient  to  form  a  mass;  divide  into  24  pills.  Dose  for  a  25-lb.  to
50-lb.  dog,  one  pill  twice  a  day.  Small  toy  dogs,  one-half  pill.  And  larger
than  50-lb.,  1  x/2  pill  as  a  dose.  Where  the  dog  is  weak  and  his  appetite
impaired,  have  druggist  add  one  grain  of  quinine  to  each  pill  when  filling
prescription.
Another  case  was  prescribed  for  as  follows:
"My  Cocker  bitch  drinks  a  great  deal  more  water  than  two  or  three
of  my  other  dogs  drink,  and  she  also  passes  a  great  deal  of  water — more
than  any  of  my  other  dogs.     Will  you  advise  me  what  to  do?
From  symptoms  you  mention  the  dog  probably  has  diabetes.  Give
some  mild  purgative  for  a  few  days.  To  allay  the  thirst  give  twice  a  day
5  to  30  drops  (according  to  size  of  dog)  of  phosphoric  acid  largely  diluted
with  water.  A  dose  of  sulphate  of  iron,  2  to  5  grains,  twice  a  day  will
tone  up  the  system.  If  the  excessive  flow  continues  after  this  treatment
use  the  following  prescription:  Gallic  acid  (one  dram),  powdered  alum
(one  dram),  powdered  opium   (12  grains),  gum  sufficient  to  form  a  mass,
and  divide  into  24  pills.  For  dogs  25  to  50  pounds  in  weight  give  one
pill  twice  a  day;  Toy  dogs,  one-half  pill.  Twenty-four  grains  quinine
added  to  the  prescription  will  be  of  value  if  the  dog  is  weak  or  appetite
impaired."
The  following,  from  Field  and  Fancy,  is  also  valuable  advice:
"Diabetes  is  characterized  by  an  abnormal  flow  of  urine,  caused  by
derangement  of  some  of  the  assimilative  organs;  when  long  established
it  produces  great  emaciation  and  weakness.  The  treatment  consists  in  giv-
ing first  a  few  doses  of  a  mild  purgative,  such  as  the  podophyllin  pills.
To  allay  the  thirst,  which  is  always  present  in  diabetes,  give  twice  a
day  5  to  30  droys  of  phosphoric  acid,  largely  diluted  with  water,  and  to
strengthen  the  system  2  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  suphate  of  iron  twice  a  day  in
water.  If  the  excessive  flow  of  urine  continues  after  this  treatment,  resort
must  be  had  to  opium,  iodine,  alum,  oak-bark,  or  its  preparations.  The
following  bolus  may  prove  useful  in  such  cases:
Astringent  Bolus  for  Diabetes. — Take  gallic  acid,  1  dr.;  powdered  alum,
1  dr.;  powdered  opium,  12  gr. ;  gum  sufficient  to  form  a  mass;  divide
into  twenty-four  pills.  Dose  for  a  twenty  pound  dog,  one  twice  a  day.
Where  the  animal  is  weak  and  the  appetite  impaired,  1  gr.  of  quinine  may
be  added   to  each  pill."
Diptheria. — Some  veterinarians  hold  that  dogs  are  liable  to  this  alarm-
ing and  fatal  disease.  At  the  slightest  suspicion  of  diphtheria,  isolate  the
patient,  as  it  is  contagious,  and  call  in  a  veterinary  surgeon  at  once.
I  have  never  had  a  case  of  diphtheria  as  yet  in  any  of  my  dogs,  but
should  I  have,  would  at  once  call  in  a  good  doctor  or  veterinarian.  This
disease  should  be  treated  the  same  as  if  in  a  person.
Dent,  at  my  request,  furnishes  the  following  article  on  this  disease:
"There*  has  been  considerable  discussion  over  this  disease,  which  is
so  alarming  in  the  human  family.  While  some  veterinarians  hold  that
this  disease  does  not  exist  in  dogs,  others  contend  as  religiously  that  it  does.
"There  are  cases  on  record  where  a  dog  has  contracted  the  disease
from  eating  the  food  that  had  previously  been  placed  before  an  affected
child,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  presume  that  the  disease  is  communicable
from  man  to  dog,  and  vice  versa,  when  we  consider  the  intimate  terms  under
which   they  exist.
"The  cause  of  this  disease  in  the  dog,  as  in  man,  is  a  specific  germ
which  attacks  the  throat,  or  nose,  or  both  and  extends  from  them  down
into  the  wind  pipe.
"Symptoms. — Difficulty  in  swallowing,  more  or  less  difficulty  in  breath-
ing,  chills,  fever,  marked  debility  and  exhaustion.
"Treatment. — The  slightest  suspicion  of  this  disease  calls  for  isolation,
increased  attention  to  sanitation,  careful  disinfection,  and  the  attenton  of  a
skillful  veterinarian,  who  should  use  antitoxin  exactly  as  used  in  human
practice.  Feed  easily  digested  food,  and  as  the  animal  passes  the  critical
period  and  approaches  convalescene,  use  a  good  tonic  condition  pill,  any
of  thoso  advertised  in  this  book."
Deafness. — A  very  considerable  number  of  dogs  suffer  from  deafness.
In  many  the  disease  is  congenital,  but  I  do  not  know  that  it  is  hereditary;
and  I  am  quite  at  a  loss  to  explain  why  congenital  deafness  is  so  much
oftener  seen  in  white  dogs,  or  those  with  a  preponderance  of  white,  than
in  those  of  any  other  color.  Bulldogs,  bull  terriers  and  white  English
terriers  seem  to  be  peculiarly  liable  to  this  defect.  Deafness  is  also  fre-
quently caused  by  accumulations  of  wax  and  this  can  be  removed  by  syring-