ness. It  is  supposed  to  be  incurable  by  our  best  authorities,  generally
occurring  in  aged  dogs — these  are  evidences  of  failing  health  and  probable
breaking  up  of  the  system.  It  frequently  follows  ophtalmia,  but  might  be
the  result  of  inflammation  or  a  wound,  or  blow.  My  Eye  Lotion  No.  2
will   do  some  good   even   in  such   cases.
Ear  Canker,  Internal. — There  are  two  forms  of  this  disease,  internal
and  external,  the  latter  generally  the  result  of  the  former.  I  will  first
prescribe  for  internal.  Canker  is  a  term  generally  applied  to  different
obstinate,  corroding,  or  heating  humors,  horses  having  it  in  the  feet,
sheep  having  "foot  rot;"  but  unless  the  irritation  is  caused  in  the  foot
of  the  dog,  sometimes  by  hard  running  on  rough  ground,  causing  cankerous  sores,  and  which  should  be  treated  the  same  as  internal  ear  canker,
it  is  not  found  in  dogs  except  in  the  ear.
Causes. — First  of  all,  and  most  common,  is  some  injury,  such  as  blows
on  the  ear  or  pulling  the  ears,  a  habit  some  people  have  as  a  method  of
correction,  and  one  that  is  most  pernicious.  Others,  of  which  probably
the  principal  one  is  getting  the  cars  full  of  water  in  diving,  swimming  or
retrieving  from  water,  followed  by  lack  of  exercise;  too  rich  food,  dirty,
damp  kennel  to  sleep  in,  and  excess  of  fat,  as  it  is  often  found  in  fat,  lazy
dogs.
Canker  may  be  the  result  of  exposure  to  cold,  over-feeding,  the  pres
ence  of  insects;  foreign  bodies,  or  an  accumulation  of  wax  in  the  ear,  are
also  fertile  causes,  while  the  most  common  is  the  washing  of  dogs  with
coarse  alkaline  soaps  which  are  totally  unfit  for  the  sensitive  skin  of  the
dog.  The  soap,  during  the  washing,  gains  access  to  the  ear,  setting  up
dangerous   inflammation.
Hugh  Dalziel  says:  "Is  there  not  another  and  frequent  cause — whether
those  sportsmen  (?)  do  not  often  produce  it  who,  instead  of  correcting
their  dogs  by  the  legitimate  means  of  the  voice  and  the  whip,  resort
to  another  method  much  to  be  condemned.  'Lugging'  a  dog  is  as  cruel
as  kicking  him,  neither  is  a  fit  mode  of  punishment  and  the  former
very   likely  to   produce   canker."
Ear  canker  is  one  of  the  nuisances  of  dog  keeping,  and  when  neg-
lected is  a  most  obstinate  complaint.  The  experienced  dogman  is  always
on  the  alert,  but  the  novice  may  not  detect  the  trouble  until  the  ear
discharges  an  acrid  secretion.  The  careful  kennelman  will  examine  his
dogs'  ears  as  a  part  of  the  daily  grooming.
Internal  Canker  is  an  inflammation  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the
passage  to  the  ear,  which  if  neglected  turns  into  ulceration  and  suppuration,
and  when  of  long  standing  a  blackish,  offensive  discharge  takes  place,
accumulating  in  the  air  passage,  and  the  interior  of  the  ear  will  be  found
red  and  inflamed.
When  you  notice  the  following  symptoms  begin  at  once  to  treat  him
for  it,  the  sooner  the  better,  to  save  your  dog  pain  and  yourself  trouble:
The  dog  thus  suffering  will  be  observed  frequently  scratching  his  ear
with  his  paw,  holding  his  head  on  one  side,  giving  it  a  violent  shake,  as
though  to  empty  something  out,  the  pain  and  irritation,  causing  him,  to
thus  shake  his  head,  whereby  the  flaps  of  they  ear  get  bruised,  ulcerations
form,  the  tips  become  sore,  the  inflammation  in  the  interior  lining  mem-
brane extends  to  the  outside  and  from  the  shaking  and  scratching  is  formed
external  canker.
When  a  dog  shakes  his  head,  scratches  his  ear  with  his  paw,  and
holds  his  head  to  one  side,  it  is  high  time  to  investigate  and  apply  remedies.
The  acrid  discharges,  if  not  cleared  away  will  lead  to  irritation  of
the  flap  of  the  ear,  the  flap  swells  and  looks  angry,  often  breaking  out  in
sores  at  the  tips  and  edges.  This  is  external  canker.  The  peculiarly  of-
fensive odor   of  the  ear  passage  is  a  sure  sign   of  internal  canker.
Treatment. — Wash  out  the  ear  with  warm  water  and  soapsuds,  use
either  Castile  or  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap;  rinse  with  clean  warm,  water  and
peroxyde  of  hydrogen,  one  part  of  peroxyde  to  four  parts  of  water  by
measure.
Dry  out  the  ear  with  absorbent  cotton  swabs  made  by  rolling  cotton
loosely  on  a  skewer  or  clean  piece  of  stick.     Dry  thoroughly.
The  ear  is  now  ready  for  treatment,  and  here  is  my  remedy  which  has
never  failed  to  cure  the  most  obstinate  cases.,  even  of  long  standing,  and
I  give  this  as  having  proved  to  be  an  infallible  cure.
I  cured  a  valuable  poodle  that  had  a  bad  case  in  both  ears  for  a
year;  three  veterinarians  having  treated  the  dog  and  failed  to  cure  him.
The  dog  was  then  shipped  to  my  kennels  and  I  sent  him  back  in  a  few
weeks  entirely  cured.  This  was  the  worst  case  I  ever  saw  or  handled,
and  I  cured  him  with  the  prescription  herewith  given:
Iodine    16   grains
Iodide  of  potassium    32   grains
Mix  these  two  first  in  a  tablespoonful  of  water  and  then  add  one  pint
of  pure  cider  vinegar.      Keep   in   bottle   corked   up.
After  ear  has  been  cleaned  out  and  dried  as  directed,  take  your  dog
and  lay  his  head  on  your  knee  and  pour  in  or  inject  with  a  rubber  syringe
if  he  will  hold  still,  about  a  tablespoonful  of  the  remedy  into  the  ear  and
gently  work  or  knead  it  in  for  a  few  minutes.  Do  this  once  a  day  only
until  the  ear  gets  better,  and  then  every  other  day  is  often  enough.  You
can  look  for  a  cure  of  ordinary  cases  in  a  week  or  less  if  treatment  was
begun  promptly  at  first  signs,  neglected  cases  requiring  more  time.
Here  are  several  other  good  remedies:
Creolin 30  grains
Sulphate  of  zinc ,  ,    16  grains
Water    8  ounces
This  one  should  be  injected  twice  daily  after  cleansing  the  ear  same
as  |or  the  first  remedy  given.
This  one  is  to  be  .used  three  times  a  day.  Cleanse  the  ear  with  in-
jections of  equal  parts  of  peroxyde  of  hydrogen  and  water  three  timefe  a
day,  then  injeet  two  t'easpoonfuls  of  the  following:  Sulphate  of  zinc  one
dram,  sugar  of  lead  two  drams,  glycerine  two  ounces,  water  six  ounces.
And  this  one  to  be  used  twice  a  day:  Sulphate  of  zinc  "ten  grains,
acetate  of  lead  thirty  grains,  credlin  one-half  ounce,  glycerine  three  ounces,
water  to  make  eight  ounces;  inject  a  tablespoonful  into  the  ear  twice  a
day.
The  discharge  from  the  ear  will  cause  sores  on  the  inside  of  flap,  so
when  injecting  the  medicine  wash  these  sores  with  the  same.  My  iodine
prescription  is  especially  good  for  these  sore  spots.  Injecting  with  rubber
syringe  is  always  best,  if  your  dog  will  hold  quiet  and  not  resist  treatment,
and  in  his  struggling  injurs  the  ear  from  the  syringe.  If  you  can't  con-
trol and  keep  him  quiet,  then  pouring  it  in  will  do,  the  main  objection  being
medicine  wasted.  I  find  very  little  trouble  in  giving  any  dog  medicine
for  I  go  at  him  easy  and  gently,  talking  to  him  and  thus  giving  him  to
understand  that  his  doctor  is  his  friend.  There  are  few  dogs  that  you
cannot  talk  to  and  reason  with,  kind  treatment  very  soon  winning  their
confidence.  You  can,  of  course,  tell  when  ear  is  cured  as  the  discharge  and
offensive  smell  ceases,  ear  looks  healthy  and  dog  has  stopped  scratching
and  shaking  his  head.
It  cannot 'be  too  firmly  insisted  upon  that,  whenever  a  dog  is  suffer-
ing from  ear  canker  or  from  any  eruption  or  skin  disease,  it  is  quite  neces-
sary to  give  a  good  internal  medicine  as  it  is  to  apply  a  suitable  external
lotion.  The  only  blood  medicine  known  to  many  dog  fanciers  is  sulphur.
A  new  prescription,  therefore,  may  not  be  out  of  place  here.  The  follow-
ing may  be  made  up  into  pills,  and  will  prove  an  excellent  all-round
tonic  and  blood  purifier.     Take  of:
Sulphate  of  iron    (dried)    12   grains
Sulphate    of   quinine    6   grains
Bicarbonate  of  soda    (dried)    24   grains
Liquorice    Root    Powder    and    Extract    of    Gentian — Sufficient    of    each    to
form  a  suitable  mass.
Divide  the  above  Into  twelve  pills,  one  of  which  morning  and  night
will  do  for  a  dog  of  20  lbs.  More  or  less  in  proportion  for  other  dogs.
Or  Dent's  or  Clayton's  Blood  Purifying  Pills  are  also  both  good  to  use,
in  old  or  very  bad  cases.  This  cannot  be  done  with  one  box  perhaps,  any
more  than  you  could  cure  yourself  with  a  single  bottle  of  spring  medi-
cine if  your  blood  was  out  of  order,  so  keep  up  treatment  until  desired
result  has  been  accomplished.
Ear  Canker,  External. — This  generally  follows  or  appears  in  connec-
tion with  internal  canker,  due  to  the  poisonous  discharge  from  ear,  caus-
ing sores  on  the  flap  or  edges  of  ear.  The  tears  and  scratches  from  briars
and  thorns  in  working  hunting  dogs  in  close  coverts,  if  not  given  attention,
may  also  set  up  external  caker.  Exteral  canker  is  a  sore  or  sores  much
of  the  nature  of  a  cancer,  a  sore  appearing  on  the  outside  or  inside  of
the  ear  which  eats  a  hole  through  to  the  other  side  if-  not  arrested.  It
is  much  harder  t©  cure  than  internal  canker.  It  often  exists  as  a  se-
quence of  inflammation,  ulceration,  or  suppuration  of  the  internal  passage.
External  canker  often  starts,  especially- in  hounds  and  pointers,  or  any
long-eared  dogs,  with  a  small  sore  that  gradually  eats  into  the  flap  until
it  makes  a  slit  in  the  ear  that  continues  to  grow  deeper,  and  will  be  per-
haps a  quarter  inch  wide.  This  will  be  scabbed  over  on  edges  of  the  slit
with  a  thin  scab,  bleeding  a  good  deal,  due  to  dog  c'ontin»allv  shaking  his
head,-  Make  a  hood  or  cap  of  a  piece  of  canvas  of  sufficient  length  to
reach  around  the  dog's  head,  having  two  pieces  of  tape  running  through
a  hem  at  each  side  lengthwise,  by  which  you  can  draw  the  cap  tight  enough
around  the  dogs'  neck  behind  tho  ears,  and  aga'n,  just  above  the  eyes,
tying  them  underneath.  This  hood  or  cap  prevents  dog  from  irritating  the
ears  by  flapping  them.
Treatment. — First  wash  and  dry  the  sores  nicely,  then  touch  the  sore
edges  twice  a  day  with  following  solution:  Sulphate  of  copper  one  dram
to  an  ounce  of  water.  Here  are  several  other  remedies:  Yellow  oxide
of  mercury  15  grains  to  one  ounce  of  simple  ointment.  Mix,  and  use
once  a  day  to  sores  after  having  first  cleaned  them.  Another  is,  if  any  of
the  sores  look  "angry"  scrape  with  a  knife  a  little  blue  stone  into  fine
powder  and  dust  the  ear  with  it;  or,  after  bathing  and  drying  nicely  touch
them  with  a  point  of  lunar  caustic.  As  soon  as  you  have  cauterized  the
sores  apply  a  damp  sponge  or  cloth.
Quoting  Hugh  Dalziel: — "There  are  other  cases  where  the  whole  of
the  external  ear  becomes  swollen  and  tender,  the  flap  thickened  and  filled
with  fluid  between  the  skin  and  the  cartilage  or  gristle;  in  such  cases
the  best  plan  is,  after  bathing  the  ears  well,  to  cut  them  with  a  lancet,
press  out  the  bloody  matter,  and,  having  again  well  washed  and  softly
dried  the  ears,  let  them  be  touched  with  the  following:
Lead  Liniment.
Goulard's  extract  of  lead    1   ounce
Glycerine  and   carbolic  acid    %    ounce
Finest  olive  oil    4  y2    ounces
"Mix  the  two  first  named,  and  add  the  oil  gently,  rubbing  together
in  a  mortar.  Shake  bottle  well  before  using.  In  getting  the  gly-
cerine and  carbolic  acid  from  your  druggist,  I  mean  it  to  be  one
part  pure  carbolic  acid  in  five  parts.
"There  is  also  a  mangy  affection  of  the  ear  which  might  be  confounded
with  external  canker;  in  such  cases  the  edges  of  the  ear  become  dry,  hot
and  scaly,  and  hair  come  out,  but  this  is  not  ear  canker  and  should  be
treated  as  mange  with  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure,  applying  it  twice  daily,  rub-
bing it  on  until  ear  softens  up  and  gently  scraping  off  the  hair  with  the
fingers."
Enlarged  Joints — All  large  joints  are  not  diseased.  In  selecting  a
pup  from  a  litter  the  big  jointed  ones  ore  to  be  preferred.  Enlarged  joints,
from  the  want  of  the  hard,  earthy  materials  in  the  bone,  which  makes  them
yielding,  so  that  they  cannot  support  the  weight  of  the  body,  consequently
giving  away,  producing  deformity,  are,  however,  often  met  with,  caused
generally  by  bad  food,  lack  of  good  water,  fresh  air  and  sunshine.  (See
Rickets.)
Ear,  Polypus  in  the — This  will  occur  sometimes  in  the  lining  mem-
brane of  the  external  meatus.  Their  removal  should  be  left  to  the  vet-
erinary surgeon.
Ear,  Wax  Hardening  in  the Warm   water   injections   are   useful   and
afterward   the  ear  should  be  carefully  dried;    or  better  yet,  glycerine  first
put  in  hot  water  and  when  cool  enough  to  use,  inject  into  dog's  ear.     His
head  laid  flat  on  one  side.  Or,  a  little  oil  of  almonds  poured  into  the  caviy  is
good.  Either  should  be  kept  up  daily  until  the  wax  is  softened.  Another
good  thing  is  one  part  spirits  of  wine  to  twenty  parts  of  lukewarm  water.
Dry  afterward  with  cotton-wool  rolled  around  a  probe  or  piece  of  pointed
stick.
Enteritis — (See   Bowels,    Inflammation   of.)
Erythema. — A  superficial  inflammation  of  the  skin.  Dogs  occasionally
have  it;  not  often  a  serious  matter,  though  at  times  quite  obstinate.  The
skin  peels,  leaving  the  part  tender  and  sore.  The  mouth  is  often  the  seat
of  the  disease,  and  the  skin  finally  becomes  wrinkled.  Administer  a  purga-
tive and  bathe  the  parts  with  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid  lotion
(non-poisonous).
Eczema. — This  is  not  contagious,  and  in  this  respect,  differs  from
mange,  which  is.  It  is  a  constitutional  trouble  and  no  external  application
alone  will  ever  cure  it,  and  you  simpy  waste  time  and  medicine  giving  ex-
ternal treatment  alone,,  for  to  insure  a  cure  of  this  disease,  internal  and
external  treatment  both  are  required.  Neither  must  you  expect  to  cure
it  up  in  a  short  time,  which  you  ran  do  in  mange,  for  eczema  requires  time
and  patience  on  your  part — and  the  proper  treatment.  The  blood  must  he
purified,  and  you  know  that  if  you  yourself  were  "taking  a  spring  medicine
for  a  general  cleaning  out  and  getting  your  blood  in  the  right  condition
you  would  not  expect  to  do  it  on  one  single  bottle  of  Dr.  Somebody's  Sarsa-
parilla.  Eczema  requires  a  proper  course  of  medicine,  but  can  be  cured.  In
this  disease. the  hair  sacks  or  follicles  are  the  "principal  seat  of  the  dis3ase,
becoming  inflamed,  and  if  the  animal  is  a  white  one  the  hair  assumes  a.
rusty  or  reddish  color  at  the  roots.  The  inside  of  the  thighs,  back  of  the
forelegs,  Hie  elbows  and  belly  art  the  parts  first  affected.  Prompt  means
must  be  taken  at  this  tinr?  to  check  it  up  or  inflammation  increases  rapidly,
and  the  entire  skin  and  subcutaneous  tissues  will  be  involved,  the  hair
drops  out  from  the  affected  follicle,  purulent  matter  exudes  and  pustules
form,  which  break  open,  the  matter  from  them  running  together  and  form-
ing scabs,  which  crack  open  and  bleed,  and  the  animal  has  become  a  pitiful
and  loathsome   object,   emitting   a   very   disagreeable   odor.
In  my  forty  years'  experience  in  handling  dogs  I  have  found  at  least
fifty  cases  of  eczema  to  one  of  mange.  Any  skin  trouble  appearing  on  a
dog  the  first  conclusion  of  so  many  is  that  it  is  mange,  and  here  is  where
the  mistake  often  comes  in.  Eczema  is  curable  in  a  dog  the  same  as  in
a  human,  but  patience  and  regular,  persistent  treatment  must  be  expected
to  be  given  the  patient.
'  In  every  article  on  eczema  given  herein  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure  will  do
the  work  externally,  and  nothing  more  certain  to  use  for  the  external  part
of  the  treatment,  in  lieu  of  any  others  advised  in  either  of  the  articles.  It
is  also  safe  and  non-poisonous.
It  will  require  a  month  or  even  two  or  three  months'  treatment  to  effect
a  cure  in  eczema,  but  if  you  follow  treatment,  and  keep  it  up  faithfully,  you
will  surely  be  rewarded  for  your  trouble  by  again  seeing  your  dog  as  lie
should  be — in  his  usual  good  health  and  condition.
A  couple  years  ago  I  found  out  something  new  to  use  internally,  for
the  blood,  in  connection  with  my  skin  remedy,,  externally.  A  pure  white
sulphur,  only  obtainable  of  a  homeopathic  druggist,  and  is  called — Sulphur
12X.  I  succeeded  in  curing  up  several  cases  of  chronic  eczema  that  I  had
failed  with  before.  One  was  a  Chow  Chow,  a  long-coated  dog,  that  was
almost  bare  of  hair,  using  the  skin  remedy  once  a  day,  well  rubbed  in  with
the  hands,  and  giving  him  morning  and  night,  mixed  in  his  food,  (as  it  is
tasteless),  as  much  as  would  hold  on  a  silver  dime.  Sometimes  I  gave  it
dry,  by  opening  mouth  and  dropping  it  well  back  on  his  tongue,  mornings,
when  his  breakfast  was  dry  Spratt's  dog  cakes.  This  dogs  coat  came  out
full,  this  part  mostly  due  to  my  skin  remedy,  which  is  a  hair  grower.  If
no  homeopathic  druggist  in  your  town,  your  druggist  can  order  it  for  you,
or,  you  can  get  it  from  me.  I  consider  this  valuable  treatment  for  eczema,
as  so  far,  it  has  not  failed  to  cure.
If  your  dog  has  skin  trouble,  find  out  whether  it  is  eczema,  or  one
of  the  several  kinds  of  mange,  see  "Mange",. also.
The  following,  on  eczema,  written  by  Dr.  F.  Holmes  Brown,  is  an  able
article  on  this  subject:
"Eczema  in  the  dog  manifests  many  of  the  same  signs  and  symptoms
of  the  same  disease  found  in  man.  No  disease  in  the  whole  range  of  skin
diseases  is  so  difficult  to  treat  properly.  In  eczema  in  the  dog  it  is  especially
important  that  one  first  of  all  find  out  what  is  causing  the  disease,  then
seek  to  remove  it.     In  that  way  only  can  we  hope  for  success.
"Eczema  is  an  acute  or  chronic  catarrhal  inflammatory  disease  of  the
skin.  In  the  dog  it  manifests  itself  in  two  separate  and  distinct  forms;  first,
the  blotch  or  nervous  or  neurotic  form,  and  second,  the  red  mange  or  irri-
tative form.  The  lesions  in  this  disease  vary  according  to  the  acting  cause,
the  seat  of  the  disease  and  the  care  given  the  dog.  The  blotch  or  neurotic
form  attaclfs  the  skin  on  the  head  and  along  the  back.  This  form  is  similar
to  the  "milk  crust"  found  in  children,  and  li  due  to  much  the  same  causes.
The  red  mange  is  that  form  in  which  the  skin  is  generally  red,  but  it  is
more  visible  under  the  legs,  on  the  back  and  abdomen.
"The  usual  form  of  eruption  in  canine  eczema  cinsists  of  a  large  num-
ber of  small  water  pimples  or  vesicles  frequently  covering  a  large  extent
of  skin.  These  are  formed  close  together,  forming  quite  large  water  blis-
ters. When  opened  these  look  cellular  in  structure  from  the  many  small
pimples  of  which  they  are  composed.  They  terminate  either  by  absorption
or  rupture.  They  come  in  crops  and  remain  for  varying  periods  of  time.
All  dogs  are  liable  to  attacks  of  this  disease.  Eczema  becomes  chronic
after  repeated  attacks.  When  we  have  a  subdued  form,  there  is  a  greater
tendency  to  crusting,  and  in  severe  cases  to  the  formation  of  pus.  In  the
blotch,  lack  of  exercise,  constipation,  over-feeding,  injurious  foods  and
indigestion  are  the  main  causes.  In  the  red  mange  form,  lack  of  assimila-
tion, rheumatism,  gout,  and  external  irritation,  as  lice  and  ticks  act  as
causes.  In  both  of  these  forms,  lack  of  exercise  is  one  of  the  most  impor-
tant causes.  This  results  in  an  over-heated  blood  surcharged  with  the
partly  assimilated  food,  and  in  nature  seek3  to  get  rid  of  this  excess  of
effete  material  by  the  skin.
"This  is  carried  off  by  the  exudation.  This  is  a  law  of  nature,  when
the  ordinary  channels  are  clogged,  to  try  and  excrete  these  substances
through  the  skin.  This  is  particularly  so  in  cases  due  to  rheumatism,  where
nature  seeks  to  rid  the  system  of  the  excess  of  uric  acid  and  urates.  These
substances  act  as  direct  irritants  to  the  skin,  and  set  up  a  catarrhal  inflam-
mation. Washing  dogs  affected  with  eczema  is  to  be  avoided,  as  much  as
possible,  as  both  water  and  soap  act  as  a  direct  irritant  to  the  already
inflamed  skin.  The  sulphate  of  magnesia  or  soda  is  in  the  beginning  of
treatment  of  great  value.  When  there  is  much  constitutional  disturbance,
opium  and  calomel  in  grain  closes  are  indicated.  Benzoated  oxide  of  zinc
ointment  in  the  milder  forms  is  of  great  benefit.  Tincture  of  arnica,  15
to  20  grains  to  the  ounce,  of  an  oily  lotion  is  of  value.  Lotions  contain-
ing salol  or  salicylic  acid  from  five  to  thirty  grains  to  the  ounce,  resorcin
in  the  same  proportion.  Dusting  powders  composed  of  acetanilid,  salol,
salicylic  acid,  or  resorcin  with  sterate  of  zinc  as  a  base,  is  of  value.  When
disease  is  due  to  debility,  mineral  tonics  and  cod  liver  oil  should  be  given.