used.  He  should  then  be  brushed  and  combed  until  thoroughly  dried.
Covering  the  dog  with  a  mixture  of  cotton  seed  oil  and  crude  coal  oil  in
equal  parts  and  then  washing  the  dog  at  the  end  of  a  half  hour  with  warm
water  and  dog  soap  will  kill  eithpr  fleas  or  lice.
Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy  will  kill  lice.  It  should  be  thoroughly  rub-
bed in,  not  missing  a  spot  on  the  dog.  After  it  has  been  on  half  an  hour,
then  the  dog  can  be  washed  and  dried;  this  bath  only  given  to  remove  the
grease,  if  it  is  a  house  pet.  .  If  in  warm  weather,  and  dog  can  be  kept  out
in  the  yard,  the  bath  is  not  necessary.  The  application  must  be  repeated
at  least  once  more,  In  twenty-four  hours,  to  kill  the  nits  or  the  young
ones  that  are  born  every  twenty-four  hours.  My  dog  soap  will  kill  lice,
if  you  apply  it  thoroughly,  and  allow  it  to  remain  on  (and  repeat  once  or
twice  more.
For  pet  or  house  dogs  the  insect  powders  generally  made  from  the
powdered  flowers  of  pyrethrum  roseum  will  be  found  most  convenient.
Unfortunately  their  expense  precludes  their  general  use  in  kennels.  The
powder  must  be  well  rubbed  into  the  roots  of  the  hair  or  blown  in  with  a
small  bellows,  made  for  that  purpose,  that  is  of  assistance  in  spreading  it
well  around  the  roots  of  the  hair.  After  allowing  it  to  remain  on  some
time — fifteen  minutes  to  one  hour — it  can  be  dusted  out  over  a  sheet  of  pa-
per, which  can  then  be  rolled  up  and  burned.
Lock-Jaw  (Tetanus) — This  is  of  very  rare  occurrence,  a  fact  all  the
more  remarkable  when  we  consider  how  liable  the  dog  is  to  various  spas-
modic affections.  I  have  never  seen  a  case  of  it  myself,  but  Blaine  describes
it,  and  it  is  a  recognized  canine  disease.  It  is  a  form  of  tetanus,  and  under
that  head  Professor  J.  Woodroffe  Hill  describes  the  symptoms:  "When  the
jaws  only  are  affected,  the  head  is  poked  out,  the  jaws  are  tightly  closed,
the  angles  of  the  mouth  are  drawn  back,  the  mouth  is  filled  with  frothy
saliva,  and  the  eyes  are  fixed  in  an  unnatural  and  often  hideous  position."
If  you  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  have  a  dog  seized  with  lock-jaw,  place
him  in  quiet  place  on  a  good  bed  where  the  light  is  subdued  and  he  will
not  be  liable   to  be   disturbed,   and   send   at  once   for   the  best  veterinary
surgeon  you  can  find.  A  cure  is  very  doubtful,  even  with  the  most  skilled
treatment;  but,  as  a  matter  of  duty  and  humanity,  try  and  help  your  dog
through  this  most  dangerous  trouble  if  it  is  possible.  All  owners  of  dogs
should  keep  informed  as  to  the  veterinarians  in  their  town  or  city,  as  to
which  one  is  experienced  in  canine  practice,  so  that  when  a  case  is  urgent,
you  will  know  what  one  to  call  in  and  just  where  to  find  him.  Officious
ignorance  and  rough  handling  would  only  cause  pain  without  the  remotest
hope  of  good  results.
Looseness  of  the  Bowels — See  Diarrhea  and  Dysentery.
Lumbago. — See  Rheumatism.
Leucorrhoea. — Use  as  an  injection  peroagina  sulphate  of  zinc,  %  dram;
acetate  of  lead,  Vz  dram  to  a  pint  of  water.  One  injection  per  day,  except
in  bad  cases  it  can  be  used  twice  daily.
Lacteal  Tumors. — No  better  treatise  on  this  trouble  can  be  given  than
Dalziel's:
"Every  dog  owner  must  know  what  a  common  <:hing  it  is  to  see  a  bitch
with  an  enlargement  of  one  of  her  teats,  or  the  structures  adjoining  them.
Now,  not  only  is  such  very  unsightly,  but  when  grown  to  a  considerable
Size,  as  it  will  do,  it  is  very  liable  to  injury.
"The  immediate  cause  is  the  damming  up  of  one  of  the  milk-ducts;
the  teat  is  'blind,'  as  it  is  called  in  dairy  parlance — that  is,  the  flow  of
milk  through  it  is  obstructed  by  some  malformation.  Far  oftener,  however,
the  milk  itself  is  the  cause;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  drained  off  sufficiently,
when  it  hardens,  acts  as  a  foreign  body,  and  still  further  as  an  irritant,  be-
cause of  its  chemical  decomposition.  The  effect  of  this  is  that  more  or  less
inflammation  of  the  milk-gland  is  produced,  a  hard  lump  forms  and  increases
gradually,  and  once  begun,  the  evil  develops  more  and  more  at  each  return-
ing period  after  oestrum,  when  pupping  has  or  should  have  taken  place.
"From  the  numerous  questions  I  have  received  on  the  subject  it  does
not  appear  to  be  generally  known  by  those  who  keep  dogs  that  some  bitches,
even  if  they  have  been  secluded  from  the  dog  during  the  period  of  'heat,'
will  secrete  a  fluid  much  resembling  milk  at  the  time  they  would  have  had
pups  had  impregnation  been  allowed,  but  such  is  the  case.  It  is,  therefore,
the  duty  of  the  owner  to  note  the  time  and  look  out  for  the  evidence  of
this  secretion  and  have  it  removed  by  hand,  or  by  one  of  the  many  breast-
exhausters,  giving  at  the  same  time  a  light  diet,  with  an  extra  proportion  of
boiled  vegetables  and  a  few  doses  of  cooling,  aperient  medicine.  Permit-
ting a  bitch  when  in  milk  to  lie  on  cold  bricks  or  flags,  or  to  be  exposed  in
other  ways  to  cold  and  damp,  may  also  cause  obstruction  af  the  teat  and
subsequent  tumors;  while  blows,  bruises  and  wounds  sometimes  produce  a
like  result.  A  not  uncommon  cause  of  these  lacteal  tumors  Is  the  hurried
drying  up  of  the  milk  by  artificial  means.  It  is  sometimes  desirable  to
destroy  pups  that  are  the  result  of  a  mesalliance,  but  it  is  absolutely  cruel
to  deprive  the  poor  mother  of  all  her  progeny.     In  addition  to  the  cruelty,
there  is  always  the  risk  of  the  flow  of  milk  clamming  up  one  or  more  of  the
teats  and  producing  tumor.
"The  measure  of  prevention  against  lacteal  tumors  will,  from  the
foregoing  remarks,  have  suggested  themselves  to  the  reader.  Nature  has
ordained  that  the  bitch  should  bring  forth  young  at  least  once  in  twelve
months,  and,  though  she  permits  us  to  take  certa'n  liberties  with  her  laws,
yet  if  we  go  beyond  a  certain  limit,  disease  follows  as  a  punishment;  even
when  we  interfere  with  her  prerogative,  it  must  not  be  by  direct  contradic-
tion, but  by  diverting  her  forces  into  other  channels.  When  we  forbid  the
bitch  to  breed  we  put  an  embargo  on  certain  functions,  and  the  energy
that  supplies  and  works  these  functions  we  divert  by  exciting  extra  secre-
tions of  the  bowels,  kidneys,  etc.;  but  the  safest,  because  the  most  natural,
prevention  of  disease,  is  to  let  the  bitch  breed.
"When  it  is  desired  to  'dry'  the  bitch,  that  is,  to  stop  the  secretion  of
milk,  it  is  wrong  to  give  alum  and  other  astringents,  and  to  rub  brandy,
etc.,  along  the  mammae.  The  object  is  more  surely  obtained  gradually,
and  that  without  the  risk  of  untoward  results,  by  drawing  off  what  m,-lk
there  is  regularly,  giving  a  spare  diet,  and  a  good  purge,  following  this
with  2  grains  to  3  grains  of  iodide  of  potassium,  twice  a  day,  and  rubbing
well  with  the  following  liniment:
L'niment  for  Drying  Bitches. — Iod'de  of  potassium,  2  drams;  soap  lini-
ment and  oil  of  camphor,  of  each  2  ounces.
When  a  tumor  does  form,  and  the  bitch  is  still  in  milk,  draw  the  milk
off  twice  a  day,  and  in  any  case,  give  a  brisk  purge.  Keep  her  on  a  spare,
and  rather  dry  diet,  and  to  one  of  20  lb.  weight  give  twice  a  day  2  grains
of  iodide  of  potassium,  in  about  two  tablespoonfuls  of  water,  immediately
after  feeding,  and  apply  twice  Or  thrice  a  day  the  following  ointment  to
the  lumps  or  swelling  i
pi'ifmeut  for  Lacteal  Tumors:
Iodide  of  potassium   ,,,,,,,,,,,      1  Arnux
powdered   camphor    ,.,,,,,.,...      1  dram
Strong  mercurial  ointment   ,,,,,,,.,...........    V2  ounce
Spermaceti  ointment    .,,,...... .  1  oinwn
Mixed,     Rub  a  little  W©il  in  with  gentle  friGUct).
If  these  means  do  not  prove  sufficient  for  the  dispersion  of  the  swell-
ing, add  to  the  above  ointment  2  scr,  of  resublimcd  iodine  dissolved  in,  a,
little  spirit  of  wine.
When  the  swelling  has  gone  on  so  far  unheeded  that  matter  is  formed,
and  becomes  soft  and  ripe  (which  may  be  told  by  the  fluctuating  of  the
enlargement  under  pressure  of  the  finders  \  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  the
lancet,  which  should  be  inserted  in  the  soft  1  a.  t,  and  a  cut  made  downwards,
to  insure  perfect  drainage.  The  parts  must  then  be  frequently  bathed,  the
matter  pressed  out,  washed  with  a  solution  of  Condy's  FluM,  and  dressed
with  Turner's  cerate,  while  the  pat;ent  should  havo  a  g^orl  ctrcn~  purg*.
These  growths  are  often,  removed  by  the  knife,  and  when  of.  long  standing
that  is  the  only  course.     Camphorated  Oil  is  also  used  in  such  cases,  and
for  drying  up  the  milk  I  have  found  it  very  satisfactory.
Dent  treats  this  subject  as  follows:
"Nature  has  ordained  that  at  least  once  a  year  certain  nervous  energies
in  the  female  clog  be  set  in  motion.  This  nervous  force  excites  the  bowels,
the  brain,  the  kidneys,  the  circulation,  and  all  the  other  organs  "of  the  body,
and  what  is  known  as  the  period  of  oestrum,  or  being  in  season,  is  the
result.  If  the  bitch  be  bred  at  this  time  a  natural  function  is  performed
and  a  natural  law  satisfied.  If  she  is  not  bred  these  functions  are  seriously
interfered  with  for  the  time,  how  seriously  or  the  extent  of  the  interference
we  do  not  know.  That  this  nervous  action  does  not  cease  or  is  entirely
suppressed  by  simply  putting  the  bitch  by  for  the  time  is  unmistakably
denied  by  subsequent  events.  A  natural  prerogative  asserts  itself  and  it  is
a  common  occurrence  for  bitches  which  have  not  been  bred  to  develop
a  feverish  disturbance  of  the  system,  a  swelling  of  the  milk  glands  and  the
secretion  of  a  whitish  fluid  resembling  milk  at  the  time  they  would  have
given  birth  to  puppies  if  they  had  been  bred.
"If  this  milky  fluid  is  not  drawn  off  with  the  breast  pump  there  is
danger  of  its  hardening  and  forming  a  lacteal  tumor.  In  passing  a  bitch
over  the  period  of  oestrum  without  breeding  her,  it  would  be  well  for  all
breeders  to  anticipate  the  possibility  of  this  secretion;  watch  for  it  at
the  proper  time.  Remove  it  if  it  appears  and  feed  for  the  time  a  light,
cooling  diet  of  stale  bread  or  dog  biscuits  softened  in  soup  or  milk,  with  an
increased  amount  of  vegetables,  and  keep  the  bowels  open  with  doses  of
cascara  sagrada  and  olive  oil  as  often  as  may  be  necessary.  In  cases  of
a  misalliance  the  puppies  are  frequently  destroyed  at  birth.  This  is  posi-
tively cruel  to  the  mother  and  the  shock  to  her  nervous  system  is  so  great  as
to  frequently  affect  her  constitution.  The  puppies  should  be  taken  away  as
previously  stated,  one  or  two  at  a  time,  and  the  milk  dried  up,  with  the
same  care  as  if  the  puppies  were  to  be  raised.
"Lacteal  tumors  sometimes  result  from  blows,  wounds,  kicks  and  other
injuries;  exposure  to  the  cold,  sudden  chills  from  lying  on  damp  straw  or
upon  cold  bricks  or  cement  floors.  The  great  proportion  of  cases,  however,  is
due  to  the  causes,  first  mentioned.
"Treatment. — To  dry  a  bitch  up  properly  and  prevent  the  formation  of
milk  tumors  after  removing  the  puppies  as  previously  described,  keep  the
bowels  open  with  cascara  sagrada  and  olive  oil;  feed  a  spare  diet  or  raw,
lean  beef,  chopped  fine,  milk,  gelatin,  eggs,  stale  bread  or  dog  biscuits  soaked
in  thin  soup.  If  there  is  any  milk  remaining  in  the  gland  draw  it  off
night  and  morning  with  a  breast  pump.
"Apply  the  following  liniment  three  times  a  day,  with  gentle  massage:
Camphorated  oil  four  ounces,  fluid  extract  of  belladonna  three  drams,  soap
liniment  two  ounces,  witch  hazel  two  ounces.
"Give  a  thirty-pound  dog  a  capsule  containing  of  the  iodide  of  potash
three  grains,  pepsin   three  grains,  gentian  three  grains,  diastase  one  grain.
"For  the  removal  of  lacteal  tumors  the  following  ointment  is  recom-
mended: Iodide  of  potassium  two  drams,  powdered  camphor  two  grains,
mercurial  ointment  two  drams,   iodine  resub  ten  grains,  five  grains  of  men-
r
thol  alcohol  q.  s.,  lanolin  three  ounces.  Apply  three  times  a  clay  and  rub  well
into  the  skin  with  gentle  friction.  The  capsules  previously  mentioned
should  also  be  given  three  times  a  day.
"Tumors  that  do  not  yield  to  the  treatment,  or  have  been  let  go  so
far  as  to  become  ripe  or  full  of  matter,  can  only  be  treated  with  the
knife.  Operations  should  only  be  entrusted  to  a  veterinary  surgeon,  who
will  insert  the  lancet  at  the  softest  spot  of  the  enlargement  and  drain  off
the  contents,  afterward  inserting  a  pledget  of  oakum  which  should  be
changed  daily.  Large  tumors  that  do  not  soften  should  be  dissected  out
entire  and  the  wound  properly  dressed."
Labor,  Premature. — This  is  occasionally  caused  by  over  exertion,  leap-
ing from  a  high  place,  injuries  and  the  abuse  of  purgatives,  as  well  as  the.
result  of  diseased  organs;  it  is  not  of  very  frequent  occurrence,  bitches
generally  whelping  exactly  sixty-three  days  after  the  visit  to  the  dog,  al-
though there  are  numerous  instances  where  the  time  is  varied  more  or
less.  When  it  does  occur  the  bitch  should  be  placed  in  a  comfortable
room  and  kept  perfectly  quiet,  fed  on  broth,  porridge,  &c,  and  repeated
doses,  one  every  four  or  five  hours,  of  opium,  should  be  given.  See  also
Parturition.
Lameness  may  arise  from  a  cut  foot,  a  thorn,  injury  to  the  spine,  or
to  one  of  the  limbs  or  joints  or  from  rheumatism,  when  it  comes  on
suddenly,  seek  for  the  cause,  and  treat  the  case  accordingly,  the  liniment
for  sprains  very  likely  to  be  of  benefit  in  many  of  such  cases.
Laryngitis,  or  Inflammation  of  the  Upper  Part  of  the  "Windpipe. — This
common  affection  is  caused  by  cold  or  incessant  barking,  the  dog  becomes
hoarse  and  the  power  to  bark  articulately  is  gone.  Yard  dogs  kept  con-
stantly on  chain,  and  very  wrong  to  so  keep  any  dog,  are  very  liable  to
contract  this  from  straining  on  their  collar  in  barking  and  trying  to  get  at
somebody  or  something  it  sees.  In  treating  laryngitis  there  is  danger  of
choking  the  dog  in  drenching  because  of  the  difficulty  in  swallowing  caused
by  the  inflammation.  The  following  electuary  in  this  or  any  case  of  sore
throat  will  be  found  safer  and  very  beneficial:
Chlorate  of  potash,  finely  powdered 2   drams
Powdered   gum    guaicum    1   dram
Powdered   gum   acacia    ' 1   dram
Oxymel   of   squills    5   drams
Honey    1   ounce
Mix,  and  place  a  teaspoonful  well  back  on  the  tongue  three  times  a
day.
Poultice  the  throat  with  hot  linseed  meal  poultices,  renewed  often,  or
bathe  with  hot  water,  and  afterwards  rubbed  well  in  the  following  liniment:
Spirit  of  turpentine .  .  ,  , 1   ounce
Spirit   of  hartshorn     ..  .,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,,,  ,    X   ounce
Tincture   of  cantharldes    %   ounce
Rape  oil   , ,,,,,,  1  ft  ounoes
Here  is  a  case  prescribed  for  by  Dent:
"I  have  an  English  setter  dog  about  twenty  months  old  that  acts  as
though  he  had  something  in  his  throat.  It  affects  his  breathing,  and  when
he  first  showed  symptoms  of  it  his  eyes  were  red  and  ran  matter.  He
eats  sometimes,  but  at  others  will  not  eat;  is  healthy  and  bright.  I  can  put
my  finger  under  his  throat  and  press  very  lightly,  and  it  almost  shuts  off
his  wind.  It  seems  as  though  there  was  a  kind  of  bunch  in  his  throat
that  is  not  natural.  (1)  Would  inflammation  of  the  larynx  cause  it?
(2)  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  a  tumor  of  the  larynx?  I  had  him  in  swim-
ming about  four  weeks  ago,  and  when  he  was  in  the  water  his  breathing
sounded  like  the  voice  of  a  frog.  Please  diagnose  and  prescribe.  Ans.—
(1)  Yes.  (2)  Yes.  Your  dog  has  laryngitis;  give  the  following:  Glycrrhiza
two  drams,  muriate  of  ammonia  one  dram,  tincture  opium  thirty  minims,
water  to  make  two  ounces;   dose  one  teaspoonful  every  four  houri."
Lungs,  Inflammation  of  (Pneumonia;  Pleurisy — Inflammation  of  the
Investing  Membrane  of  the  Lungs,  and  that  which  lines  the  Chest-CaYity —
&c.) — On  this  subject  I  give  Dalziel's  treatment  complete.
These  two  diseases  are  sometimes  co-existent,  when  it  is  known  as
pleuro-pneumonia.  It  would  be  too  much  to  expect  an  amateur  to  distin-
guish between  them;  but  as  the  causes  and  treatment  are  much  the  same,
I  shall  continue  to  treat  them  as  one  disease.  This  disease  is  of  very  com-
mon occurrence  in  dogs,  and  in  many  cases  proves  fatal.  When  it  exists  as
a  complication  of  distemper  it  is  known  as  "chest  distemper;"  but  other
Of  the  respiratory  organs  may  be  involved.
The  causes  producing  inflammation  of  the  lungs  are  generally  exposure
to  gevere  cold,  allowing  dogs  to  swim  during  inclement  weather,  clipping
dogs  or  otherwise  removing  a  greater  part  of  their  natural  covering,  or
washing  them  and  afterwards  exposing  them  to  excessive  cold,  especially
If  not  thoroughly  dried.  In  fact,  any  sudden  transition  from  a  high  to
a  low  temperature  may  produce  it,  especially  in  dogs  of  a  delicate  consti-
tution and  unused  to  roughing  it.  Again,  it  may  occur  from  over-exertion
through  running  too  far,  or  from  fractured  ribs  penetrating  the  lung-tissue.
The  more  notable  symptoms  are  quick  and  labored  breathing,  the  in*
spirations  being  full,  the  expirations  short,  and  the  breath  hot.  The  dog
sits  on  his  haunches,  and  if  obliged  to  move  doeg  so  reluctantly,  and  soon
resumes  that  position,  with  his  head  pushed  forward.  The  ribs  are  mora
or  less  fixed,  and  the  abdominal  muscles  brought  Into  action,  especially  If
pleurisy  is  present.  The  fixed  position  of  the  ribs,  with  the  heaving  of  the
flanks,  is  a  most  characteristic  symptom  of  pleurisy.  In  affections  of  the
lungs,  the  animal  stands  with  its  legs  (fore  legs)  wide  apart.  If  the  dis-
ease progresses,  the  face  has  a  haggard  expression,  the  angle  of  the  mouth
is  drawn  up,  and  the  extremities  become  deathly  cold.  If  not  relieved,  the
dog  rapidly  gets  worse,  and  the  breathing  becomes  more  labored  and  painful.
Pleurisy,  or  inflammation  of  the  investing  membrane  of  the  lungs,  often
exists  independently,  or  as  a  complication  of  pneumonia.  To  treat  this
disease  with  any  chance  of  success  it  is  important  that  the  dog  should  be
kept  where  he  can  freely  breathe  fresh,  cool,  a!r;  a  hot.  stiflin*  place  is
equally  to  be  avoided  with  a  damp  or  draughty  one.    Whilst  cool,  fresh  air
i«  insured,  the  patient  must  at  the  same  time  be  kept  warm  by  clothing:  if
necessary;  it  is  also  needful  that  he  should  be  as  little  distrubed  as  possible.
If  the  legs  are  cold,  woollen  bandages  should  be  placed  on  all  of  them.  The
diet  should  be  rather  low  at  first,  but  not  too  much  so — broth,  gruel,  etc.,
are  suitable  under  the  circumstances.
In  the  way  of  medicines,  it  is  necessary  that  the  bowels  should  be  kept
open  by  castor  oil  or  the  use  of  clysters.  The  Fever  Mixture — which  find
given  under  Catarrh,  should  be  immediately  and  diligently  administered.
Blisters  to  the  sides,  as  sometimes  advised,  are  bad,  as  they  cause
soreness  and  increase  the  pain  in  breathing.  Hot -linseed  poultices  should
alone  be  employed  throughout  the  day  and  night.  If  the  fever  is  high,  give
%  to  1  drop  of  tincture  of  aconite  every  fifteen  minutes  for  two  hours,  then
hourly  for  eight  hours.
Dogs  recovering  from  this  disease  are  always  very  weak,  and  require
very  great  care  to  prevent  a  relapse,  even  when  all  danger  appears  to  be
gone.  Only  the  most  gentle  exercise  should  be  allowed  at  first,  and  fine
weather  selected  for  it.  The  dog  will  require  nourishing  diet,  which  should
be  plain,  and  consist  for  a  time  of  broths,  etc.  a  return  to  solid  food
being  gradual.  The  dog  will  at  this  stage  be  greatly  benefited  by  tonics
and  to  build  him  up  use  either  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills,  or  Sergeant's  Con-
dition Pills.
Mange — A  troublesome,  and,  in  some  forms,  the  most  loathsome  dis-
ease met  with  in  the  dog,  occurring  in  so  many  forms  as  to  be  not  always
easy  of  distinction.  The  trouble  with  too  many  dog  owners  is,  that,  when
any  skin  trouble  appears  they  are  most  likely  to  call  it  Mange.  Mange  and
Eczema  are  too  often  confounded,  and,  as  there  is  a  decided  difference,
mange  being  a  skin  trouble,  due  to  a  parasite,  while  eczema  is  a  blood
trouble,  the  two  diseases  require  different  treatment.  The  term  mange,  as
applied  to  animals,  is  identical  with  itch  in  the  human  race,  in  both  of
which  exist  parasite  life  in  the  skin,  and  is  a  cutaneous  disease.  The  very
pronounced  distinction  between  true  mange  and  eczema,  and  other  causes
of  irritation  of  the  skin,  is  that  mange  is  caused  by  a  parasite  invisible  to
the  naked  eye,  and  that  it  is  transferable  by  contact,  from  one  animal  to
another,  while  eczema,  blotch,  surfiet  or  red  mange,  is  not.  And,  while  a
whole  kennel  may  be  suffering  from  the  latter  compalints,  it  must  be  be-
cause all  have  been  subjected  to  conditions  of  life  occasioning  derange-
ment of  the  system,  eczema  remains  an  individual  disease,  and  is  never